
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LESSER KEY OF SOLOMON GOETIA THE BOOK OF EVIL SPIRITS ***


                       The Lesser Key of Solomon




                       The Lesser Key Of Solomon

                                 GOETIA
                        The Book Of Evil Spirits

                   CONTAINS TWO HUNDRED DIAGRAMS AND
                  SEALS FOR INVOCATION AND CONVOCATION
                        OF SPIRITS. NECROMANCY,
                             WITCHCRAFT AND
                               BLACK ART.

                  TRANSLATED FROM ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS
                     IN THE BRITISH MUSEUM, LONDON

                            Ceremonial Magic

                    _Only Authorized Edition Extant_

                   Published Under The Editorship Of
                           L. W. de Laurence

                     Member Of The Eastern Order Of
                            Sacred Mysteries

                              DE LAURENCE
                                Chicago




                            Copyright, 1916
                                   By
                        de LAURENCE, SCOTT & CO.


                             SPECIAL NOTICE

          The illustrations, cover design and contents of this
           Volume are protected by copyright, and must not be
          reproduced or copied without written permission from
                            the Publishers.

         Disregard of this warning will subject the offender to
                      the penalty provided by law.




                                 Goetia

                           The Lesser Key Of
                              King Solomon




ΕΠΙΚΑΛΟΥΜΑΙ ΣΕ ΤΟΝ ΕΝ ΤΩ ΚΕΝΕΩ ΠΝΕΥΜΑΤΙ, ΔΕΙΝΟΝ, ΑΟΡΑΤΟΝ, ΠΑΝΤΟΚΡΑΤΟΡΑ.
ΘΕΟΝ ΘΕΩΝ, ΦΘΕΡΟΠΟΙΟΝ, ΚΑΙ ΕΡΗΜΟΠΟΙΟΝ, Ο ΜΙΣΩΝ ΟΙΚΙΑΝ ΕYΣΤΑΘΟΥΣΑΝ, ΩΣ
ΕΞΕΒΡΑΣΘΗΣ ΕΚ ΤΗΣ ΑΙΓΥΠΤΙΟΥ ΚΑΙ ΕΞΩ ΧΩΡΑΣ.

ΕΠΟΝΟΜΑΣΘΗΣ Ο ΠΑΝΤΑ ΡΗΣΣΩΝ ΚΑΙ ΜΗ ΝΙΚΩΜΕΝΟΣ.

ΕΠΙΚΑΛΟΥΜΑΙ ΣΕ ΤΥΦΩΝ ΣΗΘ ΤΑΣ ΣΑΣ ΜΑΝΤΕΙΑΣ ΕΠΙΤΕΛΩ, ΟΤΙ ΕΠΙΚΑΛΟΥΜΑΙ ΣΕ ΤΟ
ΣΟΝ ΑΥΘΕΝΤΙΚΟΝ ΣΟΤ ΟΝΟΜΑ ΕΝ ΟΙΣ ΟΥ ΔΥΝΗ ΠΑΡΑΚΟΥΣΑΙ ΙΩΕΡΒΗΘ, ΙΩΠΑΚΕΡΒΗΟ,
ΙΩΒΟΛΧΩΣΗΘ, ΙΩΠΑΤΑΘΝΑΞ, ΙΩΣΩΡΩ, ΙΩΝΕΒΟΥΤΟΣΟΥΑΛΗΘ, ΑΚΤΙΩΦΙ, ΕΡΕΣΧΙΓΑΛ,
ΝΕΒΟΠΟΩΑΛΗΘ, ΑΒΕΡΑΜΕΝΘΩΟΝ, ΛΕΡΘΕΞΑΝΑΞ, ΕΘΡΕΛΥΩΘ, ΝΕΜΑΡΕΒΑ, ΑΕΜΙΝΑ, ΟΛΟΝ
ΗΚΕ ΜΟΙ ΚΑΙ ΒΑΔΙΣΟΝ ΚΑΙ ΚΑΤΕΒΑΛΕ ΤΟΝ ΔΕΙΝΟΝ ΜΑΘΕΡΣ. ΡΙΓΕΙ ΚΑΙ ΠΥΡΕΙΩ
ΑΥΤΟΣ ΗΔΙΚΗΣΕΝ ΤΟΝ ΑΝΘΡΩΠΟΝ ΚΑΙ ΤΟ ΑΙΜA ΤΟΥ ΦΥΩΝΟΣ ΕΞΕΧΥΣΕΝ ΠΛΡ’ ΕΑΥΤΩ.

ΔΙΑ ΤΟΥΤΟ ΤΑΥΤΑ ΠΟΙΕΩ ΚΟΙΝΑ.




                                Preface.


This translation of the FIRST BOOK of the “_Lemegeton_” which is now for
the first time made accessible to students of TALISMANIC MAGIC was done,
after careful collation and edition, from numerous _Ancient Manuscripts_
in _Hebrew_, _Latin_, and _French_, by G. H. _Fra._ D.D.C.F., by the
order of the _Secret Chief_ of the _Rosicrucian Order_.[1] The G. H.
_Fra._, having succumbed unhappily to the assaults of the _Four Great
Princes_ (acting notably under Martial influences), it seemed expedient
that the work should be brought to its conclusion by another hand. The
investigation of a competent Skryer into the house of our unhappy
_Fra._, confirmed this divination; neither our _Fra._ nor his _Hermetic
Mul._ were there seen; but only the terrible shapes of the evil _Adepts_
S.V.A.[2] and H., whose original bodies having been sequestered by
Justice, were no longer of use to them. On this we stayed no longer Our
Hand; but withdrawing Ourselves, and consulting the Rota, and the Books
M. and Q. did decide to ask Mr. Aleister Crowley, a poet, and skilled
student of _Magical Lore_, and an expert _Kabbalist_, to complete openly
that which had been begun in secret.[3] This is that which is written:
“His Bishoprick let another take.” And again: “_Oculi Tetragammaton_.”
This is also that which is said: “Nomen Secundum refertur ad _Gebhurah_;
qui est _Rex Bittul_ atque Corruptio _Achurajim Patris et Matris_ hoc
indigitatur.”

And so saying we wish you well.

    _Ex Deo Nascimur._
    _In Jesu Morimur._
    _Per S.S. Reviviscimus._

Given forth from our Mountain of A., this day of C.C. 1903 A. D.

Footnote 1:

  _Mr. A. E. Waite_ writes (“_Real History Of The Rosicrucians_,” p.
  426): “I beg leave to warn my readers that all persons who proclaim
  themselves to be _Rosicrucians_ are simply members of
  pseudo-fraternities, and that there is that difference between their
  assertion and the fact of the case in which the essence of a lie
  consists!” It is within the _Editor’s_ personal knowledge that Mr.
  Waite was (and still is probably) a member of a society claiming to be
  the R.C. fraternity. As _Mr. Waite_ constantly hints in his writing
  that he is in touch with initiated centres, I think the _syllogism_,
  whose premises are given above, is fair, if not quite formal.—ED.

Footnote 2:

  It was owing to our _Fra._ receiving this S.V.A. as his Superior, and
  giving up the _Arcana_ of our _Fraternity_ into so unhallowed a power,
  that We decided no longer to leave Our dignity and authority in the
  hands of one who could be thus easily imposed upon. (For by a childish
  and easy magical trick did S.V.A. persuade D.D.C.F. of that lie.)

Footnote 3:

  He that is appointed to complete in secret that which had been begun
  openly is R.R., and to be heard of at the care of the Editor.




                        PRELIMINARY INVOCATION.


     _Thee I invoke, the Bornless one.
     Thee, that didst create the Earth and the Heavens:
     Thee, that didst create the Night and the Day.
     Thee, that didst create the Darkness and the Light.
     Thou art Osorronophris: Whom no man has seen at any time.
     Thou art Jäbas
     Thou art Jäpōs:
     Thou hast distinguished between the Just and the Unjust.
     Thou didst make the Female and the Male.
     Thou didst produce the Seed and the Fruit.
     Thou didst form Men to love one another, and to hate one another._

_I am Mosheh Thy Prophet, unto Whom Thou didst commit Thy Mysteries, the
Ceremonies of Ishrael:_

_Thou didst produce the moist and the dry, and that which nourisheth all
created Life._

_Hear Thou Me, for I am the Angel of Paphrō Osorronophris: this is Thy
True Name, handed down to the Prophets of Ishrael._

                  *       *       *       *       *

_Hear Me:_—

_Ar: Thiao: Rheibet: Atheleberseth:_

_A: Blatha: Abeu: Ebeu: Phi:_

_Thitasoe: Ib: Thiao._

_Hear Me, and make all Spirits subject unto Me: so that every Spirit of
the Firmament and of the Ether; upon the Earth and under the Earth: on
dry Land and in the Water: of Whirling Air, and of rushing Fire: and
every Spell and Scourge of God may be obedient unto Me._

                  *       *       *       *       *

_I invoke Thee, the Terrible and Invisible God: Who dwellest in the Void
Place of the Spirit:_—

_Arogogorobraō: Sothou:_

_Modoriō: Phalarthaō: Döö: Apé, The Bornless One:_

_Hear Me: etc._

                  *       *       *       *       *

_Hear me:_—

_Roubriaō: Mariōdam: Balbnabaoth: Assalonai: Aphniaō: I: Thoteth:
Abrasar: Aëöōü: Ischure, Mighty and Bornless One!_

_Hear me: etc._

                  *       *       *       *       *

_I invoke thee:_—

                        _Ma: Barraiō: Jōēl: Kotha:_
                        _Athorēbalō: Abraoth:_

_Hear Me: etc._

                  *       *       *       *       *

                     _Hear me!
                     Aōth: Abaōth: Basum: Isak:
                     Sabaoth: Iao:_

                     _This is the Lord of the Gods:
                     This is the Lord of the Universe:
                     This is He Whom the Winds fear._

_This is He, Who having made Voice by His Commandment, is Lord of All
Things; King, Ruler and Helper._

_Hear Me, etc._

                  *       *       *       *       *

_Hear Me:_—

_Ieou: Pūr: Iou: Pūr: Iaōt: Iaeō: Ioou: Abrasar: Sabriam: Do: Uu:
Adonaie: Ede: Edu: Angelos ton Theon: Aniaia Lai: Gaia: Ape: Diathanna
Thorun._

                  *       *       *       *       *

_I am He! the Bornless Spirit! having sight in the feet: Strong, and the
Immortal Fire!_

_I am He! the Truth!_

_I am He! Who hate that evil should be wrought in the World!_

_I am He, that lighteneth and thundereth._

_I am He, from Whom is the Shower of the Life of Earth:_

_I am He, Whose mouth ever flameth:_

_I am He, the Begetter and Manifester unto the Light:_

_I am He; the Grace of the World:_

                  *       *       *       *       *

_“The Heart Girt with a Serpent” is My Name!_

                  *       *       *       *       *

_Come Thou forth, and follow Me: and make all Spirits subject unto Me so
that every Spirit of the Firmament, and of the Ether: upon the Earth and
under the Earth: on dry Land, or in the Water: of whirling Air or of
rushing Fire: and every Spell and Scourge of God, may be obedient unto
me!_

                           _Iao: Sabao:_

                           _Such are the Words!_




                                 Goetia
                       The Lesser Key Of Solomon
           THE INITIATED INTERPRETATION OF CEREMONIAL MAGIC.


It is loftily amusing to the student of _Magical_ literature who is not
quite a fool—and rare is such a combination!—to note the criticism
directed by the Philistine against the citadel of his science. Truly,
since our childhood has ingrained into us not only literal belief in the
Bible, but also substantial belief in _Alf Laylah_ wa _Laylah_, and only
adolescence can cure us, we are only too liable, in the rush and energy
of dawning manhood, to overturn roughly and rashly both these classics,
to regard them both on the same level, as interesting documents from the
standpoint of folk-lore and anthropology, and as nothing more.

Even when we learn that the Bible, by a profound and minute study of the
text, may be forced to yield up _Qabalistic_ arcana of cosmic scope and
importance, we are too often slow to apply a similar restorative to the
companion volume, even if we are the luck holders of Burton’s veritable
edition.

To me, then, it remains to raise the _Alf Laylah_ wa Laylah into its
proper place once more.

I am not concerned to deny the objective reality of all “_magical_”
phenomena; if they are illusions, they are at least as real as many
unquestioned facts of daily life; and, if we follow Herbert Spencer,
they are at least evidence of some cause.[4]

Now, this fact is our base. What is the cause of my illusion of seeing a
spirit in the triangle of Art?

Every smatterer, every expert in psychology, will answer: “That cause
lies in your brain.”

English children (_pace_ the Education Act) are taught that the Universe
lies in infinite Space; Hindu children, in the Akasa, which is the same
thing.

Those Europeans who go a little deeper learn from Fichte, that the
phenomenal Universe is the creation of the Ego; Hindus, or Europeans
studying under Hindu Gurus, are told, that by Akasa is meant the
Chitakasa. The Chitakasa is situated in the “Third Eye”, _i.e._, in the
brain. By assuming higher dimensions of space, we can assimilate this
fact to Realism; but we have no need to take so much trouble.

This being true for the ordinary Universe, that all sense-impressions
are dependent on changes in the brain,[5] we must include illusions,
which are after all sense-impressions as much as “realities” are, in the
class of “phenomena dependent on brain-changes.”

Magical phenomena, however, come under a special sub-class, since they
are willed, and their cause is the series of “real” phenomena called the
operations of ceremonial Magic.

These consist of

    (1) Sight.

    The circle, square, triangle, vessels, lamps, robes, implements,
    etc.

    (2) Sound.

    The invocations.

    (3) Smell.

    The perfumes.

    (4) Taste.

    The Sacraments.

    (5) Touch.

    As under (1).

    (6) Mind.

    The combination of all these and reflection on their significance.

These unusual impressions (1-5) produce unusual brain-changes; hence
their summary (6) is of unusual kind. Its projection back into the
apparently phenomenal world is therefore unusual.

Herein then consists the reality of the operations and effects of
ceremonial magic,[6] and I conceive that the apology is ample, as far as
the “effects” refer only to those phenomena which appear to the magician
himself, the appearance of the spirit, his conversation, possible shocks
from imprudence, and so on, even to ecstasy on the one hand, and death
or madness on the other.

But can any of the effects described in this our book Goetia be
obtained, and if so, can you give a rational explanation of the
circumstances? Say you so?

I can, and will.

The spirits of the Goetia are portions of the human brain.

Their seals therefore represent (Mr. Spencer’s projected cube) methods
of stimulating or regulating those particular spots (through the eye).

The names of God are vibrations calculated to establish:

(_a_) General control of the brain. (Establishment of functions relative
to the subtle world.)

(_b_) Control over the brain in detail. (Rank or type of the Spirit.)

(_c_) Control of one special portion. (Name of the Spirit.)

The perfumes aid this through smell. Usually the perfume will only tend
to control a large area; but there is an attribution of perfumes to
letters of the alphabet enabling one, by a Qabalistic formula, to spell
out the Spirit’s name.

I need not enter into more particular discussion of these points; the
intelligent reader can easily fill in what is lacking.

If, then, I say, with Solomon:

“The Spirit Cimieries teaches logic,” what I mean is:

“Those portions of my brain which subserve the logical faculty may be
stimulated and developed by following out the processes called ‘The
Invocation of Cimieries.’”

And this is a purely materialistic rational statement; it is independent
of any objective hierarchy at all. Philosophy has nothing to say; and
Science can only suspend judgment, pending a proper and methodical
investigation of the facts alleged.

Unfortunately, we cannot stop there. Solomon promises us that we can (1)
obtain information; (2) destroy our enemies; (3) understand the voices
of nature; (4) obtain treasure; (5) heal diseases, etc. I have taken
these five powers at random; considerations of space forbid me to
explain all.

(1) Brings up facts from sub-consciousness.

(2) Here we come to an interesting fact. It is curious to note the
contrast between the noble means and the apparently vile ends of magical
rituals. The latter are disguises for sublime truths. “To destroy our
enemies” is to realize the illusion of duality, to excite compassion.

(Ah! Mr. Waite, the world of Magic is a mirror, wherein who sees muck is
muck.)

(3) A careful naturalist will understand much from the voices of the
animals he has studied long. Even a child knows the difference of a
cat’s miauling and purring. The faculty may be greatly developed.

(4) Business capacity may be stimulated.

(5) Abnormal states of the body may be corrected, and the involved
tissues brought back to tone, in obedience to currents started from the
brain.

So for all other phenomena. There is no effect which is truly and
necessarily miraculous.

Our Ceremonial Magic fines down, then, to a series of minute, though of
course empirical, physiological experiments, and whoso will carry them
through intelligently need not fear the result.

I have all the health, and treasure, and logic, I need; I have no time
to waste. “There is a lion in the way.” For me these practices are
useless; but for the benefit of others less fortunate I give them to the
world, together with this explanation of, and apology for, them.

I trust that the explanation will enable many students who have
hitherto, by a puerile objectivity in their view of the question,
obtained no results, to succeed; that the apology may impress upon our
scornful men of science that the study of the bacillus should give place
to that of the baculum, the little to the great—how great one only
realizes when one identifies the wand with the Mahalingam, up which
Brahma flew at the rate of 84,000 yojanas a second for 84,000
mahakalpas, down which Vishnu flew at the rate of 84,000 croces of
yojanas a second for 84,000 crores of mahakalpas—yet neither reached an
end.

But I reach an end.

                             _Boleskine House,
                             Foyers, N.B._

Footnote 4:

  This, incidentally, is perhaps the greatest argument we possess,
  pushed to its extreme, against the Advaitist theories.

Footnote 5:

  Thought is a secretion of the brain (Weissmann). Consciousness is a
  function of the brain (Huxley).

Footnote 6:

  Apart from its value in obtaining one-pointedness.




                    PRELIMINARY DEFINITION OF MAGIC.
                LEMEGETON VEL CLAVICULA SALOMONIS REGIS.


Magic is the Highest, most Absolute, and most Divine Knowledge of
Natural Philosophy,[7] advanced in its works and wonderful operations by
a right understanding of the inward and occult virtue of things; so that
true Agents[8] being applied to proper Patients,[9] strange and
admirable effects will thereby be produced. Whence magicians are
profound and diligent searchers into Nature; they, because of their
skill, know how to anticipate an effort,[10] the which to the vulgar
shall seem to be a miracle.

Origen saith that the Magical Art doth not contain anything subsisting,
but although it should, yet that it must not be Evil, or subject to
contempt or scorn; and doth distinguish the _Natural Magic_ from that
which is _Diabolical_.

Apollonius Tyannaeus only exercised the _Natural Magic_, by the which he
did perform wonderful things.

Philo Hebraeus saith that true Magic, by which we do arrive at the
understanding of the Secret Works of Nature, is so far from being
contemptible that the greatest Monarchs and Kings have studied it. Nay!
among the Persians none might reign unless he was skilful in this GREAT
ART.

This Noble Science often degenerateth, from _Natural_ becometh
_Diabolical_, and from _True Philosophy_ turneth unto _Nigromancy_.[11]
The which is wholly to be charged upon its followers, who, abusing or
not being capable of that High and Mystical Knowledge do immediately
hearken unto the temptations of _Sathan_, and are misled by him into the
Study of the _Black Art_. Hence it is that Magic lieth under disgrace,
and they who seek after it are vulgarly esteemed _Sorcerers_.

The Fraternity of the Rosie Crusians thought it not fit to style
themselves Magicians, but rather Philosophers. And they be not ignorant
Empiricks,[12] but learned and experienced Physicians, whose remedies be
not only _Lawful_ but _Divine_.

Footnote 7:

  This Preliminary Definition of Magic is found in very few Codices, and
  is probably later than the body of the work.

Footnote 8:

  Or Actives.

Footnote 9:

  Or Passives.

Footnote 10:

  Or Effect.

Footnote 11:

  Or the Black Art, as distinct from mere Necromancy, or Divination by
  the Dead.

Footnote 12:

  Or Quacks and Pretenders. Vide note on p. 10.




                  THE BRIEF INTRODUCTORY DESCRIPTION.


(N.B. This is taken from several MS. Codices, of which the four
principal variations are here composed together in parallel columns as
an example of the close agreement of the various texts of the Lemegeton.

For in the whole work the differences in the wording of the various
Codices are not sufficient to require the constant giving of parallel
readings; but except in the more ancient examples there is much
deterioration in the Seals and Sigils, so that in this latter respect
the more recent exemplars are not entirely reliable.)


                       CLAVICULA SALOMONIS REGIS,


which containeth all the Names, Offices, and Orders of all the Spirits
that ever he had converse with, with the Seals and Characters to each
Spirit and the manner of calling them forth to visible appearance:

In 5 parts, viz.:

(1) THE FIRST PART is a Book of Evil Spirits, called GOETIA, showing how
he bound up those Spirits, and used them in general things, whereby he
obtained great fame.

(2) THE SECOND PART is a Book of Spirits, partly Evil and partly Good,
which is named THEURGIA-GOETIA, all Aërial Spirits, etc.

(3) THE THIRD PART is of Spirits governing the Planetary Hours, and what
Spirits belong to every degree, of the Signs, and Planets in the Signs.
Called the PAULINE ART, etc.

(4) THE FOURTH PART of this Book is called ALMADEL or SOLOMON, which
containeth those Spirits which govern the Four Altitudes, or the 360
Degrees of the Zodiac.

These two last Orders of Spirits are Good, and to be sought for by
Divine seeking, etc., and are called THEURGIA.

(5) THE FIFTH PART is a Book of Orations and Prayers that Wise Solomon
used upon the Altar in the Temple. The which is called ARS NOVA, which
was revealed unto Solomon by that Holy Angel of God called MICHAEL; and
he also received many brief Notes written with the Finger of God, which
were declared to him by the said Angel with Claps of Thunder; without
which Notes King Solomon had never obtained his great knowledge, for by
them in a short time he knew all Arts and Sciences both Good and Bad;
from these Notes it is called the NOTARY ART, etc.


                   THE WHOLE LEMEGETON OR CLAVICULA.


Now this Book containeth all the Names, Orders, and Offices of all the
Spirits with which Solomon ever conversed, the Seals and Characters
belonging to each Spirit, and the manner of calling them forth to
visible appearance:

Divided into 5 special Books or parts, viz.:

(1) THE FIRST BOOK, or PART, which is a Book concerning Spirits of Evil,
and which is termed THE GOETIA OF SOLOMON, sheweth forth his manner of
binding these Spirits for use in things divers. And hereby did he
acquire great renown.

(2) THE SECOND BOOK is one which treateth of Spirits mingled of Good and
Evil Natures, the which is entitled THE THEURGIA-GOETIA, or the Magical
Wisdom of the Spirits Aërial, whereof some do abide, but certain do
wander and abide not.

(3) THE THIRD BOOK, called ARS PAULINA, or THE ART PAULINE, treateth of
the Spirits allotted unto every degree of the 360 Degrees of the Zodiac;
and also of the Signs, and of the Planets in the Signs, as well as of
the Hours.

(4) THE FOURTH BOOK, called ARS ALMADEL SALOMONIS, or THE ART ALMADEL OF
SOLOMON, concerneth those Spirits which be set over the Quaternary of
the Altitudes.

These two last mentioned Books, the ART PAULINE and the ART ALMADEL, do
relate unto Good Spirits alone, whose knowledge is to be obtained
through seeking unto the Divine. These two Books be also classed
together under the Name of the First and Second Parts of the Book
THEURGIA OF SOLOMON.

(5) THE FIFTH BOOK of the Lemegeton is one of Prayers and Orations. The
which Solomon the Wise did use upon the Altar in the Temple. And the
titles hereof be ARS NOVA, the NEW ART, and ARS NOTARIA, the NOTARY ART.
The which was revealed to him by MICHAEL, that Holy Angel of God, in
thunder and in lightning, and he further did receive by the aforesaid
Angel certain Notes written by the Hand of God, without the which that
Great King had never attained unto his great Wisdom, for thus he knew
all things and all Sciences and Arts whether Good or Evil.


                       CLAVICULA SALOMONIS REGIS,


which containeth all the Names, Offices, and Orders of all the Spirits
with whom he ever held any converse; together with the Seals and
Characters proper unto each Spirit, and the method of calling them forth
to visible appearance:

In 5 parts, viz.:

(1) THE FIRST PART is a Book of Evil Spirits, called GOETIA, showing how
he bound up those Spirits and used them in things general and several,
whereby he obtained great fame.

(2) THE SECOND PART is a Book of Spirits, partly Evil and partly Good,
which is called THEURGIA-GOETIA, all Aërial Spirits, etc.

(3) THE THIRD PART is of Spirits governing the Planetary Hours, and of
what Spirits do belong to every Degree of the Signs, and of the Planets
in the Signs. This is called the PAULINE ART, etc.

(4) THE FOURTH PART of this Book is called ALMADEL OF SOLOMON, the which
containeth those Spirits which do govern the Four Altitudes, or the 360
Degrees of the Zodiac.

These two last Orders of Spirits are Good, and are called THEURGIA, and
are to be sought for by Divine seeking, etc.

(5) THE FIFTH PART is a Book of Orations and Prayers which Wise Solomon
did use upon the Altar in the Temple. The which is called ARS NOVA, the
which was revealed to Solomon by that Holy Angel of God called Michael;
and he also received many brief Notes written with the Finger of God,
which were declared to him by the said Angel with Claps of Thunder;
without which Notes King Solomon had never obtained his Great Wisdom,
for by them in short time he gained Knowledge of all Arts and Sciences
both Good and Bad; from these Notes it is called the NOTARY ART, etc.




                       THE BOOK OF EVIL SPIRITS.


The Key of Solomon, which contains all the names, orders, and offices of
all the Spirits that ever Solomon conversed with, together with the
Seals and Characters belonging to each Spirit, and the manner of calling
them forth to visible appearance:

In 4 parts.

(1) THE FIRST PART is a Book of Evil Spirits, called GOETIA, showing how
he bound up those Spirits and used them in several things, whereby he
obtained great fame.

(2) THE SECOND PART is a Book of Spirits, partly Good and partly Evil,
which is named THEURGIA-GOETIA, all Aërial Spirits, etc.

(3) THE THIRD PART is a Book governing the Planetary Houses, and what
Spirits belong to every Degree of the Signs, and Planets in the Signs.
Called the Pauline Art.

(4) THE FOURTH PART is a Book called the ALMADEL OF SOLOMON, which
contains Twenty Chief Spirits who govern the Four Altitudes, or the 360
Degrees of the Zodiac.

These two last Orders of Spirits are Good, and called THEURGIA, and are
to be sought after by Divine seeking.

These Most Sacred Mysteries were revealed unto Solomon.

Now in this Book LEMEGETON is contained the whole Art of King Solomon.
And although there be many other Books that are said to be his, yet none
is to be compared hereunto, for this containeth them all. Though there
be titles with several other Names of the Book, as THE BOOK HELISOL,
which is the very same with this last Book of Lemegeton called ARS NOVA
or ARS NOTARIA, etc.

These Books were first found in the Chaldee and Hebrew Tongues at
Jerusalem by a Jewish Rabbi; and by him put into the Greek language and
thence into the Latin, as it is said.




                            SHEMHAMPHORASH.


[Transcriber’s Note: The references below to seals, such as “And this is
his Seal...”, are to the images printed above in the illustrations at
the start of the book, each indicated by the number of each spirit.]


(1.) BAEL.—The First Principal Spirit is a King ruling in the East,
called Bael. He maketh thee to go Invisible. He ruleth over 66 Legions
of Infernal Spirits. He appeareth in divers shapes, sometimes like a
Cat, sometimes like a Toad, and sometimes like a Man, and sometimes all
these forms at once. He speaketh hoarsely. This is his character which
is used to be worn as a Lamen before him who calleth him forth, or else
he will not do thee homage.

(2.) AGARES.—The Second Spirit is a Duke called Agreas, or Agares. He is
under the Power of the East, and cometh up in the form of an old fair
Man, riding upon a Crocodile, carrying a Goshawk upon his fist, and yet
mild in appearance. He maketh them to run that stand still, and bringeth
back runaways. He teaches all Languages or Tongues presently. He hath
power also to destroy Dignities both Spiritual and Temporal, and causeth
Earthquakes. He was of the Order of Virtues. He hath under his
government 31 Legions of Spirits. And this is his Seal or Character
which thou shalt wear as a Lamen before thee.

(3.) VASSAGO.—The Third Spirit is a Mighty Prince, being of the same
nature as Agares. He is called Vassago. This Spirit is of a Good Nature,
and his office is to declare things Past and to Come, and to discover
all things Hid or Lost. And he governeth 26 Legions of Spirits, and this
is his Seal.

(4.) SAMIGINA, or GAMIGIN.—The Fourth Spirit is Samigina, a Great
Marquis. He appeareth in the form of a little Horse or Ass, and then
into Human shape doth he change himself at the request of the Master. He
speaketh with a hoarse voice. He ruleth over 30 Legions of Inferiors. He
teaches all Liberal Sciences, and giveth account of Dead Souls that died
in sin. And his Seal is this, which is to be worn before the Magician
when he is Invocator, etc.

(5.) MARBAS.—The fifth Spirit is Marbas. He is a Great President, and
appeareth at first in the form of a Great Lion, but afterwards, at the
request of the Master, he putteth on Human Shape. He answereth truly of
things Hidden or Secret. He causeth Diseases and cureth them. Again, he
giveth great Wisdom and Knowledge in Mechanical Arts; and can change men
into other shapes. He governeth 36 Legions of Spirits. And his Seal is
this, which is to be worn as aforesaid.

(6.) VALEFOR.—The Sixth Spirit is Valefor. He is a mighty Duke, and
appeareth in the shape of a Lion with an Ass’s Head, bellowing. He is a
good Familiar, but tempteth them he is a familiar of to steal. He
governeth 10 Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this, which is to be worn,
whether thou wilt have him for a Familiar, or not.

(7.) AMON.—The Seventh Spirit is Amon. He is a Marquis great in power,
and most stern. He appeareth like a Wolf with a Serpent’s tail, vomiting
out of his mouth flames of fire; but at the command of the Magician he
putteth on the shape of a Man with Dog’s teeth beset in a head like a
Raven; or else like a Man with a Raven’s head (simply). He telleth all
things Past and to Come. He procureth feuds and reconcileth
controversies between friends. He governeth 40 Legions of Spirits. His
Seal is this which is to be worn as aforesaid, etc.

(8.) BARBATOS.—The Eighth Spirit is Barbatos. He is a Great Duke, and
appeareth when the Sun is in Sagittary, with four noble Kings and their
companies of great troops. He giveth understanding of the singing of
Birds, and of the Voices of other creatures, such as the barking of
Dogs. He breaketh the Hidden Treasures open that have been laid by the
Enchantments of Magicians. He is of the Order of Virtues, of which some
part he retaineth still; and he knoweth all things Past, and to come,
and conciliateth Friends and those that be in Power. He ruleth over 30
Legions of Spirits. His Seal of Obedience is this, the which wear before
thee as aforesaid.

(9) PAIMON.—The Ninth Spirit in this Order is Paimon, a Great King, and
very obedient unto LUCIFER. He appeareth in the form of a Man sitting
upon a Dromedary with a Crown most glorious upon his head. There goeth
before him also an Host of Spirits, like Men with Trumpets and well
sounding Cymbals, and all other sorts of Musical Instruments. He hath a
great Voice, and roareth at his first coming, and his speech is such
that the Magician cannot well understand unless he can compel him. This
Spirit can teach all Arts and Sciences, and other secret things. He can
discover unto thee what the Earth is, and what holdeth it up in the
Waters; and what Mind is, and where it is; or any other thing thou
mayest desire to know. He giveth Dignity, and confirmeth the same. He
bindeth or maketh any man subject unto the Magician if he so desire it.
He giveth good Familiars, and such as can teach all Arts. He is to be
observed towards the West. He is of the Order of Dominations.[13] He
hath under him 200 Legions of Spirits, and part of them are of the Order
of Angels, and the other part of Potentates. Now if thou callest this
Spirit Paimon alone, thou must make him some offering; and there will
attend him two Kings called LABAL and ABALIM, and also other Spirits who
be of the Order of Potentates in his Host, and 25 Legions. And those
Spirits which be subject unto them are not always with them unless the
Magician do compel them. His Character is this which must be worn as a
Lamen before thee, etc.

(10.) BUER.—The Tenth Spirit is Buer, a Great President. He appeareth in
Sagittary, and that is his shape when the Sun is there. He teaches
Philosophy, both Moral and Natural, and the Logic Art, and also the
Virtues of all Herbs and Plants. He healeth all distempers in man, and
giveth good Familiars. He governeth 50 Legions of Spirits, and his
Character of obedience is this, which thou must wear when thou callest
him forth unto appearance.

(11.) GUSION.—The Eleventh Spirit in order is a great and strong Duke,
called Gusion. He appeareth like a Xenopilus. He telleth all things,
Past, Present, and to Come, and showeth the meaning and resolution of
all questions thou mayest ask. He conciliateth and reconcileth
friendships, and giveth Honour and Dignity unto any. He ruleth over 40
Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this, the which wear thou as aforesaid.

(12.) SITRI.—The Twelfth Spirit is Sitri. He is a Great Prince and
appeareth at first with a Leopard’s head and the Wings of a Gryphon, but
after the command of the Master of the Exorcism he putteth on Human
shape, and that very beautiful. He enflameth men with Women’s love, and
Women with Men’s love; and causeth them also to show themselves naked if
it be desired. He governeth 60 Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this, to
be worn as a Lamen before thee, etc.

(13.) BELETH.—The Thirteenth Spirit is called Beleth (or Bileth, or
Bilet). He is a mighty King and terrible. He rideth on a pale horse with
trumpets and other kinds of musical instruments playing before him. He
is very furious at his first appearance, that is, while the Exorcist
layeth his courage; for to do this he must hold a Hazel Wand in his
hand, striking it out towards the South and East Quarters, make a
triangle, △, without the Circle, and then command him into it by the
Bonds and Charges of Spirits as hereafter followeth. And if he doth not
enter into the triangle, △, at your threats, rehearse the Bonds and
Charms before him, and then he will yield Obedience and come into it,
and do what he is commanded by the Exorcist. Yet he must receive him
courteously because he is a Great King, and do homage unto him, as the
Kings and Princes do that attend upon him. And thou must have always a
Silver Ring on the middle finger of the left hand held against thy
face,[14] as they do yet before AMAYMON. This Great King Beleth causeth
all the love that may be, both of Men and of Women, until the Master
Exorcist hath had his desire fulfilled. He is of the Order of Powers,
and he governeth 85 Legions of Spirits. His Noble Seal is this, which is
to be worn before thee at working.

(14.) LERAJE, or LERAIKHA.—The Fourteenth Spirit is called Leraje (or
Leraie). He is a Marquis Great in Power, showing himself in the likeness
of an Archer clad in Green, and carrying a Bow and Quiver. He causeth
all great Battles and Contests; and maketh wounds to putrefy that are
made with Arrows by Archers. This belongeth unto Sagittary. He governeth
30 Legions of Spirits, and this is his Seal, etc.

(15.) ELIGOS.—The Fifteenth Spirit in Order is Eligos, a Great Duke, and
appeareth in the form of a goodly Knight, carrying a Lance, an Ensign,
and a Serpent. He discovereth hidden things, and knoweth things to come;
and of Wars, and how the Soldiers will or shall meet. He causeth the
Love of Lords and Great Persons. He governeth 60 Legions of Spirits. His
Seal is this, etc.

(16.) ZEPAR.—The Sixteenth Spirit is Zepar. He is a Great Duke, and
appeareth in Red Apparel and Armour, like a Soldier. His office is to
cause Women to love Men, and to bring them together in love. He also
maketh them barren. He governeth 26 Legions of Inferior Spirits, and his
Seal is this, which he obeyeth when he seeth it.

(17.) BOTIS.—The Seventeenth Spirit is Botis, a Great President, and an
Earl. He appeareth at the first show in the form of an ugly Viper, then
at the command of the Magician he putteth on a Human shape with Great
Teeth, and two Horns, carrying a bright and sharp Sword in his hand. He
telleth all things Past, and to Come, and reconcileth Friends and Foes.
He ruleth over 60 Legions of Spirits, and this is his Seal, etc.

(18.) BATHIN.—The Eighteenth Spirit is Bathin. He is a Mighty and Strong
Duke, and appeareth like a Strong Man with the tail of a Serpent,
sitting upon a Pale-Coloured Horse. He knoweth the Virtues of Herbs and
Precious Stones, and can transport men suddenly from one country to
another. He ruleth over 30 Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this which is
to be worn as aforesaid.

(19.) SALLOS.—The Nineteenth Spirit is Sallos (or Saleos). He is a Great
and Mighty Duke, and appeareth in the form of a gallant Soldier riding
on a Crocodile, with a Ducal Crown on his head, but peaceably. He
causeth the Love of Women to Men, and of Men to Women; and governeth 30
Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this, etc.

(20.) PURSON.—The Twentieth Spirit is Purson, a Great King. His
appearance is comely, like a Man with a Lion’s face, carrying a cruel
Viper in his hand, and riding upon a Bear. Going before him are many
Trumpets sounding. He knoweth all things hidden, and can discover
Treasure, and tell all things Past, Present, and to Come. He can take a
Body either Human or Aërial, and answereth truly of all Earthly things
both Secret and Divine, and of the Creation of the World. He bringeth
forth good Familiars, and under his Government there be 22 Legions of
Spirits, partly of the Order of Virtues and partly of the Order of
Thrones. His Mark, Seal, or Character is this, unto the which he oweth
obedience, and which thou shalt wear in time of action, etc.

(21.) MARAX.—The Twenty-first Spirit is Marax.[15] He is a Great Earl
and President. He appeareth like a great Bull with a Man’s face. His
office is to make Men very knowing in Astronomy, and all other Liberal
Sciences; also he can give good Familiars, and wise, knowing the virtues
of Herbs and Stones which be precious. He governeth 30 Legions of
Spirits, and his Seal is this, which must be made and worn as aforesaid,
etc.

(22.) IPOS.—The Twenty-second Spirit is Ipos. He is an Earl, and a
Mighty Prince, and appeareth in the form of an Angel with a Lion’s Head,
and a Goose’s Foot, and Hare’s Tail. He knoweth all things Past,
Present, and to Come. He maketh men witty and bold. He governeth 36
Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this, which thou shalt wear, etc.

(23.) AIM.—The Twenty-third Spirit is Aim. He is a Great Strong Duke. He
appeareth in the form of a very handsome Man in body, but with three
Heads; the first, like a Serpent, the second like a Man having two Stars
on his Forehead, the third like a Calf. He rideth on a Viper, carrying a
Firebrand in his Hand, wherewith he setteth cities, castles, and great
Places, on fire. He maketh thee witty in all manner of ways, and giveth
true answers unto private matters. He governeth 26 Legions of Inferior
Spirits; and his Seal is this, which wear thou as aforesaid, etc.

(24.) NABERIUS.—The Twenty-fourth Spirit is Naberius. He is a most
valiant Marquis, and showeth in the form of a Black Crane, fluttering
about the Circle, and when he speaketh it is with a hoarse voice. He
maketh men cunning in all Arts and Sciences, but especially in the Art
of Rhetoric. He restoreth lost Dignities and Honours. He governeth 19
Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this, which is to be worn, etc.

(25.) GLASYA-LABOLAS.—The Twenty-fifth Spirit is Glasya-Labolas. He is a
Mighty President and Earl, and showeth himself in the form of a Dog with
Wings like a Gryphon. He teacheth all Arts and Sciences in an instant,
and is an Author of Bloodshed and Manslaughter. He teacheth all things
Past, and to Come. If desired he causeth the love both of Friends and of
Foes. He can make a Man to go Invisible. And he hath under his command
36 Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this, to be, etc.

(26.) BUNE, or BIMÉ.—The Twenty-sixth Spirit is Buné (or Bim). He is a
Strong, Great and Mighty Duke. He appeareth in the form of a Dragon with
three heads, one like a Dog, one like a Gryphon, and one like a Man. He
speaketh with a high and comely Voice. He changeth the Place of the
Dead, and causeth the Spirits which be under him to gather together upon
your Sepulchres. He giveth Riches unto a Man, and maketh him Wise and
Eloquent. He giveth true Answers unto Demands. And he governeth 30
Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this, unto the which he oweth Obedience.
He hath another Seal (which is the first of these,[16] but the last is
the best).[17]

(27.) RONOVÉ.—The Twenty-seventh Spirit is Ronové. He appeareth in the
Form of a Monster. He teacheth the Art of Rhetoric very well and giveth
Good Servants, Knowledge of Tongues, and Favours with Friends or Foes.
He is a Marquis and Great Earl; and there be under his command 19
Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this, etc.

(28.) BERITH.—The Twenty-eighth Spirit in Order, as Solomon bound them,
is named Berith. He is a Mighty, Great, and Terrible Duke. He hath two
other Names given unto him by men of later times, viz.: BEALE, or BEAL,
and BOFRY or BOLFRY. He appeareth in the Form of a Soldier with Red
Clothing, riding upon a Red Horse, and having a Crown of Gold upon his
head. He giveth true answers, Past, Present, and to Come. Thou must make
use of a Ring in calling him forth, as is before spoken of regarding
Beleth.[18] He can turn all metals into Gold. He can give Dignities, and
can confirm them unto Man. He speaketh with a very clear and subtle
Voice. He governeth 26 Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this, etc.

(29.) ASTAROTH.—The Twenty-ninth Spirit is Astaroth. He is a Mighty,
Strong Duke, and appeareth in the Form of an hurtful Angel riding on an
Infernal Beast like a Dragon, and carrying in his right hand a Viper.
Thou must in no wise let him approach too near unto thee, lest he do
thee damage by his Noisome Breath. Wherefore the Magician must hold the
Magical Ring near his face, and that will defend him. He giveth true
answers of things Past, Present, and to Come, and can discover all
Secrets. He will declare wittingly how the Spirits fell, if desired, and
the reason of his own fall. He can make men wonderfully knowing in all
Liberal Sciences. He ruleth 40 Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this,
which wear thou as a Lamen before thee, or else he will not appear nor
yet obey thee, etc.

(30.) FORNEUS.—The Thirtieth Spirit is Forneus. He is a Mighty and Great
Marquis, and appeareth in the Form of a Great Sea-Monster. He teacheth,
and maketh men wonderfully knowing in the Art of Rhetoric. He causeth
men to have a Good Name, and to have the knowledge and understanding of
Tongues. He maketh one to be beloved of his Foes as well as of his
Friends. He governeth 29 Legions of Spirits, partly of the Order of
Thrones, and partly of that of Angels. His Seal is this, which wear
thou, etc.

(31.) FORAS.—The Thirty-first Spirit is Foras. He is a Mighty President,
and appeareth in the Form of a Strong Man in Human Shape. He can give
the understanding to Men how they may know the Virtues of all Herbs and
Precious Stones. He teacheth the Arts of Logic and Ethics in all their
parts. If desired he maketh men invisible,[19] and to live long, and to
be eloquent. He can discover Treasures and recover things Lost. He
ruleth over 29 Legions of Spirits, and his Seal is this, which wear
thou, etc.

(32.) ASMODAY.—The Thirty-second Spirit is Asmoday, or Asmodai. He is a
Great King, Strong, and Powerful. He appeareth with Three Heads, whereof
the first is like a Bull, the second like a Man, and the third like a
Ram; he hath also the tail of a Serpent, and from his mouth issue Flames
of Fire. His Feet are webbed like those of a Goose. He sitteth upon an
Infernal Dragon, and beareth in his hand a Lance with a Banner. He is
first and choicest under the Power of AMAYMON, he goeth before all
other. When the Exorcist hath a mind to call him, let it be abroad, and
let him stand on his feet all the time of action, with his Cap or
Head-dress off; for if it be on, AMAYMON will deceive him and call all
his actions to be bewrayed. But as soon as the Exorcist seeth Asmoday in
the shape aforesaid, he shall call him by his Name, saying: “Art thou
Asmoday?” and he will not deny it, and by-and-by he will bow down unto
the ground. He giveth the Ring of Virtues; he teacheth the Arts of
Arithmetic, Astronomy, Geometry, and all handicrafts absolutely. He
giveth true and full answers unto thy demands. He maketh one Invincible.
He showeth the place where Treasures lie, and guardeth it. He, amongst
the Legions of AMAYMON governeth 72 Legions of Spirits Inferior. His
Seal is this which thou must wear as a Lamen upon thy breast, etc.

(33.) GAAP.—The Thirty-third Spirit is Gäap. He is a Great President and
a Mighty Prince. He appeareth when the Sun is in some of the Southern
Signs, in a Human Shape, going before Four Great and Mighty Kings, as if
he were a Guide to conduct them along on their way. His Office is to
make men Insensible or Ignorant; as also in Philosophy to make them
Knowing, and in all the Liberal Sciences. He can cause Love or Hatred,
also he can teach thee to consecrate those things that belong to the
Dominion of AMAYMON his King. He can deliver Familiars out of the
Custody of other Magicians, and answereth truly and perfectly of things
Past, Present, and to Come. He can carry and re-carry men very speedily
from one Kingdom to another, at the Will and Pleasure of the Exorcist.
He ruleth over 66 Legions of Spirits, and he was of the Order of
Potentates. His Seal is this to be made and to be worn as aforesaid,
etc.

(34.) FURFUR.—The Thirty-fourth Spirit is Furfur. He is a Great and
Mighty Earl, appearing in the Form of an Hart with a Fiery Tail. He
never speaketh truth unless he be compelled, or brought up within a
triangle, △. Being therein, he will take upon himself the Form of an
Angel. Being bidden, he speaketh with a hoarse voice. Also he will
wittingly urge Love between Man and Woman. He can raise Lightnings and
Thunders, Blasts, and Great Tempestuous Storms. And he giveth True
Answers both of Things Secret and Divine, if commanded. He ruleth over
26 Legions of Spirits. And his Seal is this, etc.

(35.) MARCHOSIAS.—The Thirty-fifth Spirit is Marchosias. He is a Great
and Mighty Marquis, appearing at first in the Form of a Wolf[20] having
Gryphon’s Wings, and a Serpent’s Tail, and Vomiting Fire out of his
mouth. But after a time, at the command of the Exorcist he putteth on
the Shape of a Man. And he is a strong fighter. He was of the Order of
Dominations. He governeth 30 Legions of Spirits. He told his Chief, who
was Solomon, that after 1,200 years he had hopes to return unto the
Seventh Throne. And his Seal is this, to be made and worn as a Lamen,
etc.

(36.) STOLAS, OR STOLOS.—The Thirty-sixth Spirit is Stolas, or Stolos.
He is a Great and Powerful Prince, appearing in the Shape of a Mighty
Raven at first before the Exorcist; but after he taketh the image of a
Man. He teacheth the Art of Astronomy, and the Virtues of Herbs and
Precious Stones. He governeth 26 Legions of Spirits; and his Seal is
this, which is, etc.

(37.) PHENEX.—The Thirty-Seventh Spirit is Phenex (or Pheynix). He is a
great Marquis, and appeareth like the Bird Phœnix, having the Voice of a
Child. He singeth many sweet notes before the Exorcist, which he must
not regard, but by-and-by he must bid him put on Human Shape. Then he
will speak marvellously of all wonderful Sciences if required. He is a
Poet, good and excellent. And he will be willing to perform thy
requests. He hath hopes also to return to the Seventh Throne after 1,200
years more, as he said unto Solomon. He governeth 20 Legions of Spirits.
And his Seal is this, which wear thou, etc.

(38.) HALPHAS, or MALTHUS.—The Thirty-eighth Spirit is Halphas, or
Malthous (or Malthas). He is a Great Earl, and appeareth in the Form of
a Stock-Dove. He speaketh with a hoarse Voice. His Office is to build up
Towers, and to furnish them with Ammunition and Weapons, and to send
Men-of-War[21] to places appointed. He ruleth over 26 Legions of
Spirits, and his Seal is this, etc.

(39.) MALPHAS.—The Thirty-ninth Spirit is Malphas. He appeareth at first
like a Crow, but after he will put on Human Shape at the request of the
Exorcist, and speak with a hoarse Voice. He is a Mighty President and
Powerful. He can build Houses and High Towers, and can bring to thy
Knowledge Enemies’ Desires and Thoughts, and that which they have done.
He giveth Good Familiars. If thou makest a Sacrifice unto him he will
receive it kindly and willingly, but he will deceive him that doth it.
He governeth 40 Legions of Spirits, and his Seal is this, etc.

(40.) RAUM.—The Fortieth Spirit is Räum. He is a Great Earl; and
appeareth at first in the Form of a Crow, but after the Command of the
Exorcist he putteth on Human Shape. His office is to steal Treasures out
King’s Houses, and to carry it whither he is commanded, and to destroy
Cities and Dignities of Men, and to tell all things, Past, and What Is,
and what Will Be; and to cause Love between Friends and Foes. He was of
the Order of Thrones. He governeth 30 Legions of Spirits; and his Seal
is this, which wear thou as aforesaid.

(41.) FOCALOR.—The Forty-first Spirit is Focalor, or Forcalor, or
Furcalor. He is a Mighty Duke and Strong. He appeareth in the Form of a
Man with Gryphon’s Wings. His office is to slay Men, and to drown them
in the Waters, and to overthrow Ships of War, for he hath Power over
both Winds and Seas; but he will not hurt any man or thing if he be
commanded to the contrary by the Exorcist. He also hath hopes to return
to the Seventh Throne after 1,000 years. He governeth 30 Legions of
Spirits, and his Seal is this, etc.

(42.) VEPAR.—The Forty-second Spirit is Vepar, or Vephar. He is a Duke
Great and Strong and appeareth like a Mermaid. His office is to govern
the Waters, and to guide Ships laden with Arms, Armour, and Ammunition,
etc., thereon. And at the request of the Exorcist he can cause the seas
to be right stormy and to appear full of ships. Also he maketh men to
die in Three Days by Putrefying Wounds or Sores, and causing Worms to
breed in them. He governeth 29 Legions of Spirits, and his Seal is this,
etc.

(43.) SABNOCK.—The Forty-third Spirit, as King Solomon commanded them
into the Vessel of Brass, is called Sabnock, or Savnok. He is a Marquis,
Mighty, Great and Strong, appearing in the Form of an Armed Soldier with
a Lion’s Head, riding on a pale-coloured horse. His office is to build
high Towers, Castles and Cities, and to furnish them with Armour, etc.
Also he can afflict Men for many days with Wounds and with Sores rotten
and full of Worms. He giveth Good Familiars at the request of the
Exorcist. He commandeth 50 Legions of Spirits; and his Seal is this,
etc.

(44.) SHAX.—The Forty-fourth Spirit is Shax, or Shaz (or Shass). He is a
Great Marquis and appeareth in the Form of a Stock-Dove, speaking with a
voice hoarse, but yet subtle. His Office is to take away the Sight,
Hearing, or Understanding of any Man or Woman at the command of the
Exorcist; and to steal money out of the houses of Kings, and to carry it
again in 1,200 years. If commanded he will fetch Horses at the request
of the Exorcist, or any other thing. But he must first be commanded into
a Triangle, △, or else he will deceive him, and tell him many Lies. He
can discover all things that are Hidden, and not kept by Wicked Spirits.
He giveth good Familiars, sometimes. He governeth 30 Legions of Spirits,
and his Seal is this, etc.

(45.) VINÉ.—The Forty-fifth Spirit is Viné, or Vinea. He is a Great
King, and an Earl; and appeareth in the Form of a Lion,[22] riding upon
a Black Horse, and bearing a Viper in his hand. His Office is to
discover Things Hidden, Witches, Wizards, and Things Present, Past, and
to Come. He, at the command of the Exorcist will build Towers, overthrow
Great Stone Walls, and make the Waters rough with Storms. He governeth
36 Legions of Spirits. And his Seal is this, which wear thou, as
aforesaid, etc.

(46.) BIFRONS.—The Forty-sixth Spirit is called Bifrons, or Bifröus, or
Bifrovs. He is an Earl, and appeareth in the Form of a Monster; but
after a while, at the Command of the Exorcist, he putteth on the shape
of a Man. His Office is to make one knowing in Astrology, Geometry, and
other Arts and Sciences. He teacheth the Virtues of Precious Stones and
Woods. He changeth Dead Bodies, and putteth them in another place; also
he lighteth seeming Candles upon the Graves of the Dead. He hath under
his Command 6 Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this, which he will own
and submit unto, etc.

(47.) UVALL, VUAL, or VOVAL.—The Forty-seventh Spirit is Uvall, or Vual,
or Voval. He is a Duke, Great, Mighty, and Strong; and appeareth in the
Form of a Mighty Dromedary at the first, but after a while at the
Command of the Exorcist he putteth on Human Shape, and speaketh the
Egyptian Tongue, but not perfectly.[23] His Office is to procure the
Love of Woman, and to tell Things Past, Present, and to Come. He also
procureth Friendship between Friends and Foes. He was of the Order of
Potestates or Powers. He governeth 37 Legions of Spirits, and his Seal
is this, to be made and worn before thee, etc.

(48.) HAAGENTI.—The Forty-eighth Spirit is Haagenti. He is a President,
appearing in the Form of a Mighty Bull with Gryphon’s Wings. This is at
first, but after, at the Command of the Exorcist he putteth on Human
Shape. His Office is to make Men wise, and to instruct them in divers
things; also to Transmute all Metals into Gold; and to change Wine into
Water, and Water into Wine. He governeth 33 Legions of Spirits, and his
Seal is this, etc.

(49.) CROCELL.—The Forty-ninth Spirit is Crocell, or Crokel. He
appeareth in the Form of an Angel. He is a Duke Great and Strong,
speaking something Mystically of Hidden Things. He teacheth the Art of
Geometry and the Liberal Sciences. He, at the Command of the Exorcist,
will produce Great Noises like the Rushings of many Waters, although
there be none. He warmeth Waters, and discovereth Baths. He was of the
Order of Potestates, or Powers, before his fall, as he declared unto the
King Solomon. He governeth 48 Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this, the
which wear thou as aforesaid.

(50.) FURCAS.—The Fiftieth Spirit is Furcas. He is a Knight, and
appeareth in the Form of a Cruel Old Man with a long Beard and a hoary
Head, riding upon a pale-coloured Horse, with a Sharp Weapon in his
hand. His Office is to teach the Arts of Philosophy, Astrology,
Rhetoric, Logic, Cheiromancy, and Pyromancy, in all their parts, and
perfectly. He hath under his Power 20 Legions of Spirits. His Seal, or
Mark, is thus made, etc.

(51.) BALAM.—The Fifty-first Spirit is Balam or Balaam. He is a
Terrible, Great, and Powerful King. He appeareth with three Heads: the
first is like that of a Bull; the second is like that of a Man; the
third is like that of a Ram. He hath the Tail of a Serpent, and Flaming
Eyes. He rideth upon a furious Bear, and carrieth a Boshawk upon his
Fist. He speaketh with a hoarse Voice, giving True Answers of Things
Past, Present, and to Come. He maketh men to go Invisible, and also to
be Witty. He governeth 40 Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this, etc.

(52.) ALLOCES.—The Fifty-second Spirit is Alloces, or Alocas. He is a
Duke, Great, Mighty, and Strong, appearing in the Form of a Soldier[24]
riding upon a Great Horse. His Face is like that of a Lion, very Red,
and having Flaming Eyes. His Speech is hoarse and very big.[25] His
Office is to teach the Art of Astronomy, and all the Liberal Sciences.
He bringeth unto thee Good Familiars; also he ruleth over 36 Legions of
Spirits. His Seal is this, which, etc.

(53.) CAMIO or CAIM.—The Fifty-third Spirit is Camio, or Caim. He is a
Great President, and appeareth in the Form of the Bird called a Thrush
at first, but afterwards he putteth on the Shape of a Man carrying in
his Hand a Sharp Sword. He seemeth to answer in Burning Ashes, or in
Coals of Fire. He is a Good Disputer. His Office is to give unto Men the
Understanding of all Birds, Lowing of Bullocks, Barking of Dogs, and
other Creatures; and also of the Voice of the Waters. He giveth True
Answers of Things to Come. He was of the Order of Angels, but now ruleth
over 30 Legions of Spirits Infernal. His Seal is this, which wear thou,
etc.

(54.) MURMUR, or MURMUS.—The Fifty-fourth Spirit is called Murmur, or
Murmus, or Murmux. He is a Great Duke, and an Earl; and appeareth in the
Form of a Warrior riding upon a Gryphon, with a Ducal Crown upon his
Head. There do go before him those his Ministers with great Trumpets
sounding. His Office is to teach Philosophy perfectly, and to constrain
Souls Deceased to come before the Exorcist to answer those questions
which he may wish to put to them, if desired. He was partly of the Order
of Thrones, and partly of that of Angels. He now ruleth 30 Legions of
Spirits. And his Seal is this, etc.

(55.) OROBAS.—The Fifty-fifth Spirit is Orobas. He is a great and Mighty
Prince, appearing at first like a Horse; but after the command of the
Exorcist he putteth on the Image of a Man. His Office is to discover all
things Past, Present, and to Come; also to give Dignities, and
Prelacies, and the Favour of Friends and of Foes. He giveth True Answers
of Divinity, and of the Creation of the World. He is very faithful unto
the Exorcist, and will not suffer him to be tempted of any Spirit. He
governeth 20 Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this, etc.

(56.) GREMORY, or GAMORI.—The Fifty-sixth Spirit is Gremory, or Gamori.
He is a Duke Strong and Powerful, and appeareth in the Form of a
Beautiful Woman, with a Duchess’s Crown tied about her waist, and riding
on a Great Camel. His Office is to tell of all Things Past, Present, and
to Come; and of Treasures Hid, and what they lie in; and to procure the
Love of Women both Young and Old. He governeth 26 Legions of Spirits,
and his Seal is this, etc.

(57.) OSÉ, or VOSO.—The Fifty-seventh Spirit is Oso, Osé, or Voso. He is
a Great President, and appeareth like a Leopard at the first, but after
a little time he putteth on the Shape of a Man. His Office is to make
one cunning in the Liberal Sciences, and to give True Answers of Divine
and Secret Things; also to change a Man into any Shape that the Exorcist
pleaseth, so that he that is so changed will not think any other thing
than that he is in verity that Creature or Thing he is changed into. He
governeth 30[26] Legions of Spirits, and this is his Seal, etc.

(58.) AMY, or AVNAS.—The Fifty-eighth Spirit is Amy, or Avnas. He is a
Great President, and appeareth at first in the Form of a Flaming Fire;
but after a while he putteth on the Shape of a Man. His office is to
make one Wonderful Knowing[27] in Astrology and all the Liberal
Sciences. He giveth Good Familiars, and can bewray Treasure that is kept
by Spirits. He governeth 36 Legions of Spirits, and his Seal is this,
etc.

(59.) ORIAX, or ORIAS.—The Fifty-ninth Spirit is Oriax, or Orias. He is
a Great Marquis, and appeareth in the Form of a Lion,[28] riding upon a
Horse Mighty and Strong, with a Serpent’s Tail;[29] and he holdeth in
his Right Hand two Great Serpents hissing. His Office is to teach the
Virtues of the Stars, and to know the Mansions of the Planets, and how
to understand their Virtues. He also transformeth Men, and he giveth
Dignities, Prelacies, and Confirmation thereof; also Favour with Friends
and with Foes. He doth govern 30 Legions of Spirits; and his Seal is
this, etc.

(60.) VAPULA, or NAPHULA.—The Sixtieth Spirit is Vapula, or Naphula. He
is a Duke Great, Mighty, and Strong; appearing in the Form of a Lion
with Gryphon’s Wings. His Office is to make Men Knowing in all
Handcrafts and Professions, also in Philosophy, and other Sciences. He
governeth 36 Legions of Spirits, and his Seal or Character is thus made,
and thou shalt wear it as aforesaid, etc.

(61.) ZAGAN.—The Sixty-first Spirit is Zagan. He is a Great King and
President, appearing at first in the Form of a Bull with Gryphon’s
Wings; but after a while he putteth on Human Shape. He maketh Men Witty.
He can turn Wine into Water, and Blood into Wine, also Water into Wine.
He can turn all Metals into Coin of the Dominion that Metal is of. He
can even make Fools wise. He governeth 33 Legions of Spirits, and his
Seal is this, etc.

(62.) VOLAC, or VALAK, or VALU, or UALAC.—The Sixty-second Spirit is
Volac, or Valak, or Valu. He is a President Mighty and Great, and
appeareth like a Child with Angel’s Wings, riding on a Two-headed
Dragon. His Office is to give True Answers of Hidden Treasures, and to
tell where Serpents may be seen. The which he will bring unto the
Exorciser without any Force or Strength being by him employed. He
governeth 38 Legions of Spirits, and his Seal is thus.

(63.) ANDRAS.—The Sixty-third Spirit is Andras. He is a Great Marquis,
appearing in the Form of an Angel with a Head like a Black Night Raven,
riding upon a strong Black Wolf, and having a Sharp and Bright Sword
flourished aloft in his hand. His Office is to sow Discords. If the
Exorcist have not a care, he will slay both him and his fellows. He
governeth 30 Legions of Spirits, and this is his Seal, etc.

(64.) HAURES, or HAURAS, or HAVRES, or FLAUROS.—The Sixty-fourth Spirit
is Haures, or Hauras, or Havres, or Flauros. He is a Great Duke, and
appeareth at first like a Leopard, Mighty, Terrible, and Strong, but
after a while, at the Command of the Exorcist, he putteth on Human Shape
with Eyes Flaming and Fiery, and a most Terrible Countenance. He giveth
True Answers of all things, Present, Past, and to Come. But if he be not
commanded into a Triangle, △, he will Lie in all these Things, and
deceive and beguile the Exorcist in these things, or in such and such
business. He will, lastly, talk of the Creation of the World, and of
Divinity, and of how he and other Spirits fell. He destroyeth and
burneth up those who be the Enemies of the Exorcist should he so desire
it; also he will not suffer him to be tempted by any other Spirit or
otherwise. He governeth 36 Legions of Spirits, and his Seal is this, to
be worn as a Lamen, etc.

(65.) ANDREALPHUS.—The Sixty-fifth Spirit is Andrealphus. He is a Mighty
Marquis, appearing at first in the form of a Peacock, with great Noises.
But after a time he putteth on Human shape. He can teach Geometry
perfectly. He maketh Men very subtle therein; and in all Things
pertaining unto Mensuration or Astronomy. He can transform a Man into
the Likeness of a Bird. He governeth 30 Legions of Infernal Spirits, and
his Seal is this, etc.

(66.) CIMEJES, or CIMEIES, or KIMARIS.—The Sixty-sixth Spirit is
Cimejes, or Cimeies, or Kimaris. He is a Marquis, Mighty, Great, Strong
and Powerful, appearing like a Valiant Warrior riding upon a goodly
Black Horse. He ruleth over all Spirits in the parts of Africa. His
Office is to teach perfectly Grammar, Logic, Rhetoric, and to discover
things Lost or Hidden, and Treasures. He governeth 20 Legions of
Infernals; and his Seal is this, etc.

(67.) AMDUSIAS, or AMDUKIAS.—The Sixty-seventh Spirit is Amdusias, or
Amdukias. He is a Duke Great and Strong, appearing at first like a
Unicorn, but at the request of the Exorcist he standeth before him in
Human Shape, causing Trumpets, and all manner of Musical Instruments to
be heard, but not soon or immediately. Also he can cause Trees to bend
and incline according to the Exorcist’s Will. He giveth Excellent
Familiars. He governeth 29 Legions of Spirits. And his Seal is this,
etc.

(68.) BELIAL.—The Sixty-eighth Spirit is Belial. He is a Mighty and a
Powerful King, and was created next after LUCIFER. He appeareth in the
Form of Two Beautiful Angels sitting in a Chariot of Fire. He speaketh
with a Comely Voice, and declareth that he fell first from among the
worthier sort, that were before Michael, and other Heavenly Angels. His
Office is to distribute Presentations and Senatorships, etc.; and to
cause favour of Friends and of Foes. He giveth excellent Familiars, and
governeth 50 Legions of Spirits. Note well that this King Belial must
have Offerings, Sacrifices and Gifts presented unto him by the Exorcist,
or else he will not give True Answers unto his Demands. But then he
tarrieth not one hour in the Truth, unless he be constrained by Divine
Power. And his Seal is this, which is to be worn as aforesaid, etc.

(69.) DECARABIA.—The Sixty-ninth Spirit is Decarabia. He appeareth in
the Form of a Star in a Pentacle, at first; but after, at the command of
the Exorcist, he putteth on the image of a Man. His Office is to
discover the Virtues of Birds and Precious Stones, and to make the
Similitude of all kinds of Birds to fly before the Exorcist, singing and
drinking as natural Birds do. He governeth 30 Legions of Spirits, being
himself a Great Marquis. And this is his Seal, which is to be worn, etc.

(70.) SEERE, SEAR, or SEIR.—The Seventieth Spirit is Seere, Sear, or
Seir. He is a Mighty Prince, and Powerful, under AMAYMON, King of the
East. He appeareth in the Form of a Beautiful Man, riding upon a Winged
Horse. His Office is to go and come; and to bring abundance of things to
pass on a sudden, and to carry or recarry anything whither thou wouldest
have it to go, or whence thou wouldest have it from. He can pass over
the whole Earth in the twinkling of an Eye. He giveth a True relation of
all sorts of Theft, and of Treasure hid, and of many other things. He is
of an indifferent Good Nature, and is willing to do anything which the
Exorcist desireth. He governeth 26 Legions of Spirits. And this his Seal
is to be worn, etc.

(71.) DANTALION.—The Seventy-first Spirit is Dantalion. He is a Duke
Great and Mighty, appearing in the Form of a Man with many Countenances,
all Men’s and Women’s Faces; and he hath a Book in his right hand. His
Office is to teach all Arts and Sciences unto any; and to declare the
Secret Counsel of any one; for he knoweth the Thoughts of all Men and
Women, and can change them at his Will. He can cause Love, and show the
Similitude of any person, and show the same by a Vision, let them be in
what part of the World they Will. He governeth 36 Legions of Spirits;
and this is his Seal, which wear thou, etc.

(72.) ANDROMALIUS.—The Seventy-second Spirit in Order is named
Andromalius. He is an Earl, Great and Mighty, appearing in the Form of a
Man holding a Great Serpent in his Hand. His Office is to bring back
both a Thief, and the Goods which be stolen; and to discover all
Wickedness, and Underhand Dealing; and to punish all Thieves and other
Wicked People and also to discover Treasures that be Hid. He ruleth over
36 Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this, the which wear thou as
aforesaid, etc.

THESE be the 72 Mighty Kings and Princes which King Solomon Commanded
into a Vessel of Brass, together with their Legions. Of whom BELIAL,
BILETH, ASMODAY, and GAAP, were Chief. And it is to be noted that
Solomon did this because of their pride, for he never declared other
reason why he thus bound them. And when he had thus bound them up and
sealed the Vessel, he by Divine Power did chase them all into a deep
Lake or Hole in Babylon. And they of Babylon, wondering to see such a
thing, they did then go wholly into the Lake, to break the Vessel open,
expecting to find great store of Treasure therein. But when they had
broken it open, out flew the Chief Spirits immediately, with their
Legions following them; and they were all restored to their former
places except BELIAL, who entered into a certain Image, and thence gave
answers unto those who did offer Sacrifices unto him, and did worship
the Image as their God, etc.

Footnote 13:

  Or Dominions, as they are usually termed.

Footnote 14:

  To protect him from the flaming breath of the enraged Spirit; the
  design is given at the end of the instructions for the Magical Circle,
  etc., later on in the Goetia.

Footnote 15:

  In some Codices written Morax, but I consider the above the correct
  orthography.

Footnote 16:

  Figure 30.

Footnote 17:

  Figure 31.

Footnote 18:

  See _ante_, Spirit No. 13.

Footnote 19:

  One or two Codices have “invincible,” but “invisible” is given in the
  majority. Yet the form of appearance of Foras as a strong man might
  warrant the former, though from the nature of his offices the
  invincibility would probably be rather on the mental than on the
  physical plane.

Footnote 20:

  In one Codex of the seventeenth century, very badly written, it might
  be read “Ox” instead of “Wolf.”—TRANS. [For me he appeared always like
  an ox, and very dazed.—ED.]

Footnote 21:

  Or Warriors, or Men-at-Arms.

Footnote 22:

  Or “with the Head of a Lion,” or “having a Lion’s Head,” in some
  Codices.

Footnote 23:

  He can nowadays converse in sound though colloquial Coptic.—ED.

Footnote 24:

  Or Warrior.

Footnote 25:

  Thus expressed in the Codices.

Footnote 26:

  Should be 30. For these 72 Great Spirits of the Book Goetia are all
  Princes and Leaders of numbers.

Footnote 27:

  Thus in the actual Text.

Footnote 28:

  Or “with the Face of a Lion.”

Footnote 29:

  The horse, or the Markis?—ED.




                             OBSERVATIONS.


First, thou shalt know and observe the Moon’s Age for thy working. The
best days be when the Moon Luna is 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, or 14 days old,
as Solomon saith; and no other days be profitable. The Seals of the 72
Kings are to be made in Metals. The Chief Kings’ in Sol (Gold);
Marquises’ in Luna (Silver); Dukes’ in Venus (Copper); Prelacies’ in
Jupiter (Tin); Knights’ in Saturn (Lead); Presidents’ in Mercury
(Mercury); Earls’ in Venus (Copper), and Luna (Silver), alike equal,
etc.

THESE 72 Kings be under the Power of AMAYMON, CORSON, ZIMIMAY or
ZIMINAIR, and GÖAP, who are the Four Great Kings ruling in the Four
Quarters, or Cardinal Points,[30] viz.: East, West, North, and South,
and are not to be called forth except it be upon Great Occasions; but
are to be Invocated and Commanded to send such or such a Spirit that is
under their Power and Rule, as is shown in the following Invocations or
Conjurations. And the Chief Kings may be bound from 9 till 12 o’clock at
Noon, and from 3 till Sunset; Marquises may be bound from 3 in the
afternoon till 9 at Night, and from 9 at Night till Sunrise; Dukes may
be bound from Sunrise till Noonday in Clear Weather; Prelates may be
bound any hour of the Day; Knights may from Dawning of Day till Sunrise,
or from 4 o’clock till Sunset; Presidents may be bound any time,
excepting Twilight, at Night, unless the King whom they are under be
Invocated; and Counties or Earls any hour of the Day, so it be in Woods,
or in any other places whither men resort not, or where no noise is,
etc.

Footnote 30:

  These four Great Kings are usually called Oriens, or Uriens, Paymon or
  Paymonia, Ariton or Egyn, and Amaymon or Amaimon. By the Rabbins they
  are frequently entitled: Samael, Azazel, Azäel, and Mahazael.


  CLASSIFIED LIST OF THE 72 CHIEF SPIRITS OF THE GOETIA, ACCORDING TO
                            RESPECTIVE RANK.


(Seal in Gold.) KINGS.—(1.) Bael; (9.) Paimon; (13.) Beleth; (20.)
Purson; (32.) Asmoday; (45.) Viné; (51.) Balam; (61.) Zagan; (68.)
Belial.

(Seal in Copper.) DUKES.—(2.) Agares; (6.) Valefor; (8.) Barbatos; (11.)
Gusion; (15.) Eligos; (16.) Zepar; (18.) Bathim; (19.) Sallos; (23.)
Aim; (26.) Buné; (28.) Berith; (29.) Astaroth; (41.) Focalor; (42.)
Vepar; (47.) Vual; (49.) Crocell; (52.) Alloces; (54.) Murmur; (56.)
Gremory; (60.) Vapula; (64.) Haures; (67.) Amdusias; (71.) Dantalion.

(Seal in Tin.) PRINCES AND PRELATES.—(3.) Vassago; (12.) Sitri; (22.)
Ipos; (33.) Gäap; (36.) Stolas; (55.) Orobas; (70.) Seere.

(Seal in Silver.) MARQUISES.—(4.) Samigina; (7.) Amon; (14.) Lerajé;
(24.) Naberius; (27.) Ronové; (30.) Forneus; (35.) Marchosias; (37.)
Phenex; (43.) Sabnock; (44.) Shax; (59.) Orias; (63.) Andras; (65.)
Andrealphus; (66.) Cimeies; (69.) Decarabia.

(Seal in Mercury.) PRESIDENTS.—(5.) Marbas; (10.) Buer; (17.) Botis;
(21.) Marax; (25.) Glasya-Labolas; (31.) Foras; (33.) Gäap; (39.)
Malphas; (48.) Häagenti; (53.) Caïm; (57.) Ose; (58.) Amy; (61.) Zagan;
(62.) Valac.

(Seal in Copper and Silver alike equal.) EARLS, or COUNTS.—(17.) Botis;
(21.) Marax; (25.) Glasya-Labolas; (27.) Ronové; (34.) Furfur; (38.)
Halphas; (40.) Räum; (45.) Viné; (46.) Bifrons; (72.) Andromalius.

(Seal in Lead.) KNIGHTS.—(50.) Furcas.

NOTE.—It will be remarked that several among the above Spirits possess
two titles of different ranks; _e.g._, (45.) Viné is both King and Earl;
(25.) Glasya-Labolas is both President and Earl, etc. “Prince” and
“Prelate” are apparently used as interchangeable terms. Probably the
Seals of Earls should be made of Iron, and those of Presidents in
mixture either of Copper and Silver, or of Silver and Mercury; as
otherwise the Metal of one Planet, Mars, is excluded from the List; the
Metals attributed to the Seven Planets being: to Saturn, Lead; to
Jupiter, Tin; to Mars, Iron; to the Sun, Gold; to Venus, Copper; to
Mercury, Mercury and mixtures of Metals, and to Luna, Silver.

In a manuscript codex by Dr. Rudd, which is in the British Museum,
Hebrew names of these 72 Spirits are given; but it appears to me that
many are manifestly incorrect in orthography. The codex in question,
though beautifully written, also contains many other errors,
particularly in the Sigils. Such as they are, these names in the Hebrew
of Dr. Rudd are here shown. (_See Figures 81 to 152 inclusive._)


                          THE MAGICAL CIRCLE.


This is the Form of the Magical Circle of King Solomon, the which he
made that he might preserve himself therein from the malice of these
Evil Spirits. (_See Frontispiece, Figure 153._) This Magical Circle is
to be made 9 feet across, and the Divine Names are to be written around
it, beginning at EHYEH, and ending at LEVANAH, Luna.

(Colours.—The space between the outer and inner circles, where the
serpent is coiled, with the Hebrew names written along his body, is
bright deep yellow. The square in the centre of the circle, where the
word “Master” is written, is filled in with red. All names and letters
are in black. In the Hexagrams the outer triangles where the letters A,
D, O, N, A, I, appear are filled in with bright yellow, the centres,
where the T-shaped crosses are, blue or green. In the Pentagrams outside
the circle, the outer triangles where “Te, tra, gram, ma, ton,” is
written, are filled in bright yellow, and the centres with the T crosses
written therein are red.[31])

Footnote 31:

  The coiled serpent is only shown in one private codex, the Hebrew
  names being in most cases simply written round in a somewhat spiral
  arrangement within the double circle. It is to be remembered that
  Hebrew is always written from right to left, instead of from left to
  right like ordinary European languages. The small Maltese crosses are
  placed to mark the conclusion of each separate set of Hebrew names.
  These names are those of Deity Angels and Archangels allotted by the
  Qabalists to each of the 9 first Sephiroth or Divine Emanations. In
  English letters they run thus, beginning from the head of the serpent:
  + Ehyeh Kether Metatron Chaioth Ha-Qadehs Rashith Ha-Galgalim S.P.M.
  (for “Sphere of the Primum Mobile”) + Iah Chokmah Ratziel Auphanim
  Masloth S.S.F (for “Sphere of the Fixed Stars,” or S.Z. for “Sphere of
  the Zodiac”) + Iehovah Eolhim Binah Tzaphquiel Aralim Shabbathai S.
  (for “Sphere”) of Saturn + El Chesed Tzadquiel Chaschmalim Tzedeq S.
  of Jupiter + Elohim Gibor Geburah Kamael Seraphim Madim S. of Mars +
  Iehovah Eloah Va-Daäth Tiphereth Raphaēl Malakim Shemesh S. of the Sun
  + Iehovah Tzabaoth Netzach Haniel Elohim Nogah S. of Venus. + Elohim
  Tzabaoth Hod Michaēl Beni Elohim Kokav S. of Mercury + Shaddaï El Chai
  Iesod Gabriel Cherubim Levanah S. of the Moon +.


                    THE MAGICAL TRIANGLE OF SOLOMON.


This is the Form of the Magical Triangle, into the which Solomon did
command the Evil Spirits. It is to be made at 2 feet distance from the
Magical Circle and it is 3 feet across. (_See Frontispiece Figure 154._)
Note that this triangle is to be placed toward that quarter whereunto
the Spirit belongeth. And the base of the triangle is to be nearest unto
the Circle, the apex pointing in the direction of the quarter of the
Spirit. Observe thou also the Moon in thy working, as aforesaid, etc.
Anaphaxeton is sometimes written Anepheneton.

(Colours.—Triangle outlined in black; name of Michael black on white
ground; the three Names without the triangle written in red; circle in
centre entirely filled in in dark green.)


                        THE HEXAGRAM OF SOLOMON.


This is the Form of the Hexagram of Solomon, the figure whereof is to be
made on parchment of a calf’s skin, and worn at the skirt of thy white
vestment, and covered with a cloth of fine linen white and pure, the
which is to be shown unto the Spirits when they do appear, so that they
be compelled to take human shape upon them and be obedient.

(Colours.—Circle, Hexagon, and T cross in centre outlined in black,
Maltese crosses black; the five exterior triangles of the Hexagram where
Te, tra, gram, ma, ton, is written, are filled in with bright yellow;
the T cross in centre is red, with the three little squares therein in
black. The lower exterior triangle, where the Sigil is drawn in black,
is left white. The words “Tetragrammaton” and “Tau” are in black
letters; and AGLA with Alpha and Omega in red letters.)


                       THE PENTAGRAM OF SOLOMON.


This is the Form of Pentagram of Solomon, the figure whereof is to be
made in Sol or Luna (Gold or Silver), and worn upon thy breast; having
the Seal of the Spirit required upon the other side thereof. It is to
preserve thee from danger, and also to command the Spirits by.

(Colours.—Circle and pentagram outlined in black. Names and Sigils
within Pentagram black also. “Tetragrammaton” in red letters. Ground of
centre of Pentagram, where “Soluzen” is written, green. External angles
of Pentagram where “Abdia,” “Ballaton,” “Halliza,” etc., are written,
blue.)


                   THE MAGIC RING OR DISC OF SOLOMON.


This is the Form of the Magic Ring, or rather Disc, of Solomon, the
figure whereof is to be made in gold or silver. It is to be held before
the face of the exorcist to preserve him from the stinking sulphurous
fumes and flaming breath of the Evil Spirits.

(Colour.—Bright yellow. Letters, black.)


                          THE VESSEL OF BRASS.


This is the Form of the Vessel of Brass wherein King Solomon did shut up
the Evil Spirits, etc. (_See Figures 158 and 159._) (Somewhat different
forms are given in the various codices. The seal in Figure 160 was made
in brass to cover this vessel with at the top. This history of the genii
shut up in the brazen vessel by King Solomon recalls the story of “The
Fisherman and the Jinni” in “The Arabian Nights.” In this tale, however,
there was only one jinni shut up in a vessel of yellow brass the which
was covered at the top with a leaden seal. This jinni tells the
fisherman that his name is Sakhr, or Sacar.)

(Colour.—Bronze. Letters.—Black on a red band.)


                      THE SECRET SEAL OF SOLOMON.


This is the Form of the Secret Seal of Solomon, wherewith he did bind
and seal up the aforesaid Spirits with their legions in the Vessel of
Brass.

This seal is to be made by one that is clean both inwardly and
outwardly, and that hath not defiled himself by any woman in the space
of a month, but hath in prayer and fasting desired of God to forgive him
all his sins, etc.

It is to be made on the day of Mars or Saturn (Tuesday or Saturday) at
night at 12 o’clock, and written upon virgin parchment with the blood of
a black cock that never trode hen. Note that on this night the moon must
be increasing in light (_i.e._, going from new to full) and in the
Zodiacal Sign of Virgo. And when the seal is so made thou shalt perfume
it with alum, raisins dried in the sun, dates, cedar and lignum aloes.

Also, by this seal King Solomon did command all the aforesaid Spirits in
the Vessel of Brass, and did seal it up with this same seal. He by it
gained the love of all manner of persons, and overcame in battle, for
neither weapons, nor fire, nor water could hurt him. And this privy seal
was made to cover the vessel at the top withal, etc.

Note: Figures 162 to 174 inclusive are interesting as showing a marked
resemblance to the central design of the Secret Seal. It will be
observed that the evident desire is to represent hieroglyphically a
person raising his or her hands in adoration. Nearly all are stone
sepulchral steles, and the execution of them is rough and primitive in
the extreme. Most are in the Musée du Louvre at Paris.

Figures 162 and 163 are from the district of Constantine and show a
figure raising its arms in adoration.

In Figure 164, also from Constantine, the person bears a palm branch in
the right hand. Above is a hieroglyphic representing either the Lunar
Disc or the Sun in the heavens; but more probably the former.

Figure 165 is a more complicated stele. Above is the symbol already
mentioned, then comes the sign of the Pentagram, represented by a
five-pointed star, towards which the person raises his or her hands.
Besides the latter is a rude form of caduceus. A brief inscription
follows in the Punic character. The Punic or Carthaginian language is
usually considered to have been a dialect of Phœnician, and Carthage was
of course a colony of Tyre. Beneath the Tunic inscription is a horse’s
head in better drawing than the sculpture of the rest of the stele,
which would seem to imply that the rudeness of the representation of the
human figure is intentional. This and the following stele are also from
Constantine.

In Figure 166 again, the horse is best delineated by far. In addition to
the other symbols there is either a hand or a foot, for it is almost
impossible to distinguish which, at the head of the stele, followed by
an egg-and-tongue moulding. The figure of the person with the arms
raised is treated as a pure hieroglyphic and is placed between two rude
caducei. The Lunar or Solar Symbol follows.

Figure 167, also from Constantine, shows the last-mentioned symbol
above. The figure with the arms raised is simply a hieroglyph, and is
placed between an arm and hand on the one side, and a rude caduceus on
the other.

Figure 168 shows the person holding a rude caduceus in the right hand,
and standing above a dolphin. This latter, as in the case of the horse
in 165 and 166, is by far the best delineated.

Figure 169, this also being from Constantine, shows the usual human
hieroglyph between a caduceus and a crescent.

Figure 170 is from the site of ancient Carthage. It is very rough in
workmanship, and the designs are mere scratchings on the stone. The
_ensemble_ has the effect of an evil Sigil.

Figure 171 is also from Carthage and the various symbols appear to have
become compressed into and synthesised in the form of a peculiarly
evil-looking caduceus.

Figure 172 is from the decoration of a sepulchral urn found at
Oldenburgh in Germany. It is remarkable as showing the same hieroglyphic
human form with the crescent above; the latter in the Secret Seal of
Solomon has a flattened top, and is therefore more like a bowl, and is
placed across the hieroglyph.

Figure 173 is an Egyptian design which would show an analogy between the
symbol and the idea of the force of the creation.

Figure 174 is a stele from Phœnicia somewhat similar to the others,
except that the rudimentary caducei in Figures 166 and 170 are here
replaced by two roughly drawn Ionic columns.

These last three designs are taken from the work of the Chevalier Emile
Soldi-Colbert de Beaulieu, on the “_Langue Sacrée_.”

In Figure 175 is given the Seal of the Spirit HALAHEL. This Spirit is
said to be under the rule of BAEL, and to be of a mixed nature, partly
good and partly evil, like the spirits of Theurgia-Goetia which follow
in the second book of the Lemegeton.


                     THE OTHER MAGICAL REQUISITES.


The other magical requisites are: a sceptre, a sword, a mitre, a cap, a
long white robe of linen, and other garments for the purpose;[32] also a
girdle of lion’s skin three inches broad, with all the names written
about it which be round the outmost part of the Magical Circle. Also
perfumes, and a chafing-dish of charcoal kindled to put the fumes on, to
smoke or perfume the place appointed for action; also anointing oil to
anoint thy temples and thine eyes with; and fair water to wash thyself
in. And in so doing, thou shalt say as David said:

THE ADORATION AT THE BATH.

“Thou shalt purge me with hyssop, O Lord! and I shall be clean: Thou
shalt wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow.”

And at the putting on of thy garments thou shalt say: THE ADORATION AT
THE INDUING OF THE VESTMENTS.

“By the figurative mystery of these holy vestures (or of this holy
vestment) I will clothe me with the armour of salvation in the strength
of the Most High, ANCHOR; AMACOR; AMIDES; THEODINIAS; ANITOR; that my
desired end may be effected through Thy strength, O ADONAI! unto Whom
the praise and glory will for ever and ever belong! Amen!”

After thou hast so done, make prayers unto God according unto thy work,
as Solomon hath commanded.

Footnote 32:

  In many Codices it is written “a sceptre or sword, a mitre or cap.” By
  the “other garments” would be meant not only under-garments, but also
  mantles of different colours.


      THE CONJURATION TO CALL FORTH ANY OF THE AFORESAID SPIRITS.


I do invocate and conjure thee, O Spirit, N.[33]; and being with power
armed from the SUPREME MAJESTY, I do strongly command thee, by
BERALANENSIS, BALDACHIENSIS, PAUMACHIA, and APOLOGIAE SEDES; by the most
Powerful Princes, Genii, Liachidæ, and Ministers of the Tartarean Abode;
and by the Chief Prince of the Seat of Apologia in the Ninth Legion, I
do invoke thee, and by invocating conjure thee. And being armed with
power from the SUPREME MAJESTY, I do strongly command thee, by Him Who
spake and it was done, and unto whom all creatures be obedient. Also I,
being made after the image of GOD, endued with power from GOD and
created according unto His will, do exorcise thee by that most mighty
and powerful name of GOD, EL, strong and wonderful; O thou Spirit N. And
I command thee and Him who spake the Word and HIS FIAT was accomplished,
and by all the names of God. Also by the names ADONAI, EL, ELOHIM,
ELOHI, EHYEH, ASHER EHYEH, ZABAOTH, ELION, IAH, TETRAGRAMMATON, SHADDAI,
LORD GOD MOST HIGH, I do exorcise thee and do powerfully command thee, O
thou Spirit N., that thou dost forthwith appear unto me here before this
Circle in a fair human shape, without any deformity or tortuosity. And
by this ineffable name, TETRAGRAMMATON IEHOVAH, do I command thee, at
the which being heard the elements are overthrown, the air is shaken,
the sea runneth back, the fire is quenched, the earth trembleth, and all
the hosts of the celestials, terrestrials, and infernals do tremble
together, and are troubled and confounded. Wherefore come thou, O Spirit
N., forthwith, and without delay, from any or all parts of the world
wherever thou mayest be, and make rational answers unto all things that
I shall demand of thee. Come thou peaceably, visibly, and affably, now,
and without delay, manifesting that which I shall desire. For thou art
conjured by the name of the LIVING and TRUE GOD, HELIOREN, wherefore
fulfil thou my commands, and persist thou therein unto the end, and
according unto mine interest, visibly and affably speaking unto me with
a voice clear and intelligible without any ambiguity.

Repeat this conjuration as often as thou pleasest, and if the Spirit
come not yet, say as followeth:


                        THE SECOND CONJURATION.


I do invocate, conjure, and command thee, O thou Spirit N., to appear
and to show thyself visibly unto me before this Circle in fair and
comely shape, without any deformity or tortuosity; by the name and in
the name IAH and VAU, which Adam heard and spake; and by the name of
GOD, AGLA, which Lot heard and was saved with his family; and by the
name IOTH, which Jacob heard from the angel wrestling with him, and was
delivered from the hand of Esau his brother; and by the name ANAPHAXETON
which Aaron heard and spake and was made wise; and by the name ZABAOTH,
which Moses named and all the rivers were turned into blood; and by the
name ASHER EHYEH ORISTON, which Moses named, and all the rivers brought
forth frogs, and they ascended into the houses, destroying all things;
and by the name ELION, which Moses named, and there was great hail such
as had not been since the beginning of the world; and by the name
ADONAI, which Moses named, and there came up locusts, which appeared
upon the whole land, and devoured all which the hail had left; and by
the name SCHEMA AMATHIA which Ioshua called upon, and the sun stayed his
course; and by the name ALPHA and OMEGA, which Daniel named, and
destroyed Bel, and slew the Dragon; and in the name EMMANUEL, which the
three children, Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-nego, sang in the midst of
the fiery furnace, and were delivered; and by the name HAGIOS; and by
the SEAL[34] OF ADONI; and by ISCHYROS, ATHANATOS, PARACLETOS; and by O
THEOS, ICTROS, ATHANATOS; and by these three secret names, AGLA, ON,
TETRAGRAMMATON, do I adjure and constrain thee. And by these names, and
by all the other names of the LIVING and TRUE GOD, the LORD ALMIGHTY, I
do exorcise and command thee, O Spirit N., even by Him Who spake the
Word and it was done, and to Whom all creatures are obedient; and by the
dreadful judgments of GOD; and by the uncertain Sea of Glass, which is
before the DIVINE MAJESTY, mighty and powerful; by the four beasts
before the throne, having eyes before and behind; by the fire round
about the throne; by the holy angels of Heaven; and by the mighty wisdom
of GOD; I do potently exorcise thee, that thou appearest here before
this Circle, to fulfil my will in all things which shall seem good unto
me; by the Seal of BASDATHEA BALDACHIA; and by this name PRIMEUMATON,
which Moses named, and the earth opened, and did swallow up Kora,
Dathan, and Abiram. Wherefore thou shalt make faithful answers unto all
my demands, O Spirit N., and shalt perform all my desires so far as in
thine office thou art capable hereof. Wherefore, come thou, visibly,
peaceably, and affably, now without delay, to manifest that which I
desire, speaking with a clear and perfect voice, intelligibly, and to
mine understanding.

If he come not yet at the rehearsal of these two first conjurations (but
without doubt he will), say on as followeth; it being a constraint:


                            THE CONSTRAINT.


I do conjure thee, O thou Spirit N., by all the most glorious and
efficacious names of the MOST GREAT AND INCOMPREHENSIBLE LORD GOD OF
HOSTS, that thou comest quickly and without delay from all parts and
places of the earth and world wherever thou mayest be, to make rational
answers unto my demands, and that visibly and affably, speaking with a
voice intelligible unto mine understanding as aforesaid. I conjure and
constrain thee, O thou Spirit N., by all the names aforesaid; and in
addition by these seven great names wherewith Solomon the Wise bound
thee and thy companions in a Vessel of Brass, ADONAI, PREYAI or PRERAI,
TETRAGRAMMATON, ANAPHAXETON or ANEPHENETON, INESSENFATOAL or
INESSENFATALL, PATHTUMON or PATHATUMON, and ITEMON; that thou appearest
here before this Circle to fulfil my will in all things that seem good
unto me. And if thou be still so disobedient, and refusest still to
come, I will in the power and by the power of the name of the SUPREME
AND EVERLASTING LORD GOD WHO created both thee and me and all the world
in six days, and what is contained therein, EIE, SARAYE, and by the
power of this name PRIMEUMATON which commandeth the whole host of
Heaven, curse thee, and deprive thee of thine office, joy, and place,
and bind thee in the depths of the Bottomless Pit or Abyss, there to
remain unto the Day of the Last Judgment. And I will bind thee in the
Eternal Fire, and into the Lake of Flame and of Brimstone, unless thou
comest quickly and appearest here before this Circle to do my will.
Therefore, come thou! in and by the holy names ADONAI, ZABAOTH, ADONAI,
AMIORAN. Come thou! for it is ADONAI who commandest thee.

If thou hast come thus far, and yet he appeareth not, thou mayest be
sure that he is sent unto some other place by his King, and cannot come;
and if it be so, invocate the King as here followeth, to send him. But
if he do not come still, then thou mayest be sure that he is bound in
chains in hell, and that he is not in the custody of his King. If so,
and thou still hast a desire to call him even from thence, thou must
rehearse the general curse which is called the Spirits’ Chain.

Here followeth, therefore, the Invocation of the King:[35]


                      THE INVOCATION OF THE KING.


O thou great, powerful, and mighty KING AMAIMON, who bearest rule by the
power of the SUPREME GOD EL over all spirits both superior and inferior
of the Infernal Orders in the Dominion of the East; I do invocate and
command thee by the especial and true name of God; and by that God that
Thou Worshippest; and by the Seal of thy creation; and by the most
mighty and powerful name of GOD, IEHOVAH TETRAGRAMMATON who cast thee
out of heaven with all other infernal spirits; and by all the most
powerful and great names of GOD who created Heaven, and Earth, and Hell,
and all things in them contained; and by their power and virtue; and by
the name PRIMEUMATON who commandeth the whole host of Heaven; that thou
mayest cause, enforce, and compel the Spirit N. to come unto me here
before this Circle in a fair and comely shape, without harm unto me or
unto any other creature, to answer truly and faithfully unto all my
requests; so that I may accomplish my will and desire in knowing or
obtaining any matter or thing which by office thou knowest is proper for
him to perform or accomplish, through the power of GOD, EL, Who created
and doth dispose of all things both celestial, aërial, terrestrial, and
infernal.

After thou shalt have invocated the King in this manner twice or thrice
over, then conjure the spirit thou wouldst call forth by the aforesaid
conjurations, rehearsing them several times together, and he will come
without doubt, if not at the first or second time of rehearsing. But if
he do not come, add the “Spirits’ Chain” unto the end of the aforesaid
conjurations, and he will be forced to come, even if he be bound in
chains, for the chains must break off from him, and he will be at
liberty:


 THE GENERAL CURSE, CALLED THE SPIRITS’ CHAIN, AGAINST ALL SPIRITS THAT
                                 REBEL.


O thou wicked and disobedient spirit N., because thou hast rebelled, and
hast not obeyed nor regarded my words which I have rehearsed; they being
all glorious and incomprehensible names of the true GOD, the maker and
creator of thee and of me, and of all the world; I do by the power of
these names the which no creature is able to resist, curse thee into the
depth of the Bottomless Abyss, there to remain unto the Day of Doom in
chains, and in fire and brimstone unquenchable, unless thou forthwith
appear here before this Circle, in this triangle to do my will. And,
therefore, come thou quickly and peaceably, in and by these names of
GOD, ADONAI, ZABAOTH, ADONAI, AMIORAN; come thou! come thou! for it is
the King of Kings, even ADONAI, who commandeth thee.

When thou shalt have rehearsed thus far, but still he cometh not, then
write thou his seal on parchment and put thou it into a strong black
box;[36] with brimstone, assafœtida, and such like things that bear a
stinking smell; and then bind the box up round with an iron wire, and
hang it upon the point of thy sword, and hold it over the fire of
charcoal; and say as followeth unto the fire first, it being placed
toward that quarter whence the Spirit is to come:


                      THE CONJURATION OF THE FIRE.


I conjure thee, O fire, by him who made thee and all other creatures for
good in the world, that thou torment, burn, and consume this Spirit N.,
for everlasting. I condemn thee, thou Spirit N., because thou art
disobedient and obeyest not my commandment, nor keepest the precepts of
the LORD THY GOD, neither wilt thou obey me nor mine invocations, having
thereby called thee forth, I, who am the servant of the MOST HIGH AND
IMPERIAL LORD GOD OF HOSTS, IEHOVAH, I who am dignified and fortified by
His celestial power and permission, and yet thou comest not to answer
these my propositions here made unto thee. For the which thine
averseness and contempt thou art guilty of great disobedience and
rebellion, and therefore shall I excommunicate thee, and destroy thy
name and seal, the which I have enclosed in this box; and shall burn
thee in the immortal fire and bury thee in immortal oblivion; unless
thou immediately come and appear visibly and affably, friendly and
courteously here unto me before this Circle, in this triangle, in a form
comely and fair, and in no wise terrible, hurtful, or frightful to me or
any other creature whatsoever upon the face of earth. And thou shalt
make rational answers unto my requests, and perform all my desires in
all things, that I shall make unto thee.

And if he come not even yet, thou shalt say as followeth:


                         THE GREATER CURSE.[37]


Now, O thou Spirit N., since thou art still pernicious and disobedient,
and wilt not appear unto me to answer unto such things as I would have
desired of thee, or would have been satisfied in; I do in the name, and
by the power and dignity of the Omnipresent and Immortal Lord God of
Hosts IEHOVAH TETRAGRAMMATON, the only creator of Heaven, and Earth, and
Hell, and all that is therein, who is the marvellous Disposer of all
things both visible and invisible, curse thee, and deprive thee of all
thine office, joy, and place; and I do bind thee in the depths of the
Bottomless Abyss there to remain until the Day of Judgment, I say into
the Lake of Fire and Brimstone which is prepared for all rebellious,
disobedient, obstinate, and pernicious spirits. Let all the company of
Heaven curse thee! Let the sun, moon, and all the stars curse thee! Let
the LIGHT and all the hosts of Heaven curse thee into the fire
unquenchable, and into the torments unspeakable. And as thy name and
seal contained in this box chained and bound up, shall be choken in
sulphurous stinking substances, and burned in this material fire; so in
the name IEHOVAH and by the power and dignity of these three names,
TETRAGRAMMATON, ANAPHAXETON, and PRIMEUMATON, I do cast thee, O thou
wicked and disobedient Spirit N., into the Lake of Fire which is
prepared for the damnéd and accurséd spirits, and there to remain unto
the day of doom, and never more to be remembered before the face of God,
who shall come to judge the quick, and the dead, and the world, by fire.

Then the exorcist must put the box into the fire, and by-and-by the
Spirit will come, but as soon as he is come, quench the fire that the
box is in, and make a sweet perfume, and give him welcome and a kind
entertainment, showing unto him the Pentacle that is at the bottom of
your vesture covered with a linen cloth, saying:


              THE ADDRESS UNTO THE SPIRIT UPON HIS COMING.


Behold thy confusion if thou refusest to be obedient! Behold the
Pentacle of Solomon which I have brought here before thy presence!
Behold the person of the exorcist in the midst of the exorcism; him who
is arméd by God and without fear; him who potently invocateth thee and
calleth thee forth unto appearance; even him, thy master, who is called
OCTINIMOS. Wherefore make rational answer unto my demands, and prepare
to be obedient unto thy master in the name of the Lord:

BATHAL OR VATHAT RUSHING UPON ABRAC!

ABEOR COMING UPON ABERER![38]

Then he or they will be obedient, and bid thee ask what thou wilt, for
he or they be subjected by God to fulfil our desires and commands. And
when he or they shall have appeared and showed himself or themselves
humble and meek, then shalt thou rehearse:


                      THE WELCOME UNTO THE SPIRIT.


Welcome Spirit N., O most noble king[39] (or kings)! I say thou art
welcome unto me, because I have called thee through Him who has created
Heaven, and Earth, and Hell, and all that is in them contained, and
because also thou hast obeyed. By that same power by the which I have
called thee forth, I bind thee, that thou remain affably and visibly
here before this Circle (or before this Circle and in this triangle) so
constant and so long as I shall have occasion for thy presence; and not
to depart without my license until thou hast duly and faithfully
performed my will without any falsity.

Then standing in the midst of the Circle, thou shall stretch forth thine
hand in a gesture of command and say:

“BY THE PENTACLE OF SOLOMON HAVE I CALLED THEE! GIVE UNTO ME A TRUE
ANSWER.”

Then let the exorcist state his desires and requests.

And when the evocation is finished thou shalt license the Spirit to
depart thus:


                         THE LICENSE TO DEPART.


O thou Spirit N., because thou hast diligently answered unto my demands,
and hast been very ready and willing to come at my call, I do here
license thee to depart unto thy proper place; without causing harm or
danger unto man or beast. Depart, then, I say, and be thou very ready to
come at my call, being duly exorcised and conjured by the sacred rites
of magic. I charge thee to withdraw peaceably and quietly, and the peace
of GOD be ever continued between thee and me! AMEN!

After thou hast given the Spirit license to depart, thou art not to go
out of the circle until he or they be gone, and until thou shalt have
made prayers and rendered thanks unto God for the great blessings He
hath bestowed upon thee in granting thy desires, and delivering thee
from all the malice of the enemy the devil.

Also note! Thou mayest command these spirits into the Vessel of Brass in
the same manner as thou dost into the triangle, by saying: “that thou
dost forthwith appear before this Circle, in this Vessel of Brass, in a
fair and comely shape,” etc., as hath been shown in the fore-going
conjurations.

Footnote 33:

  Here interpolate the name of the Spirit desired to be invocated. In
  some of the Codices there are faint variations in the form of wording
  of the conjurations, but not sufficient to change the sense, _e. g._,
  “Tartarean abode” for “Tartarean seat,” etc.

Footnote 34:

  In some “By the Seat of Adonai” or “By the Throne of Adonai.” In these
  conjurations and elsewhere in the body of the text I have given the
  divine names correctly.

Footnote 35:

  It will depend on the quarter to which the Spirit is attributed, which
  of the four chief kings are to be invoked.

Footnote 36:

  This box should evidently be in metal or in something which does not
  take fire easily.

Footnote 37:

  In some codices this is called “the Curse” only; but in one or two the
  “Spirits’ Chain” is called “the Lesser Curse,” and this the “Greater
  Curse.”

Footnote 38:

  In the Latin, “Bathal vel Vathat super Abrac ruens! Abeor veniens
  super Aberer!”

Footnote 39:

  Or whatever his dignity may be.




       EXPLANATION OF CERTAIN NAMES USED IN THIS BOOK LEMEGETON.


    _Eheie._ _Kether._—Almighty God, whose dwelling is in the highest
    Heavens:

    _Haioth._—The great King of Heaven, and of all the powers therein:

    _Methratton._—And of all the holy hosts of Angels and Archangels:

    _Reschith._—Hear the prayers of Thy servant who putteth his trust in
    Thee:

    _Hagalgalim._—Let thy Holy Angels be commanded to assist me at this
    time and at all times.

    _Iehovah._—God Almighty, God Omnipotent, hear my prayer:

    _Hadonat._—Command Thy Holy Angels above the fixed stars:

    _Ophanim._—To be assisting and aiding Thy servant:

    _Iophiel._—That I may command all spirits of air, water, fire,
    earth, and hell:

    _Masloth._—So that it may tend unto Thy glory and unto the good of
    man.

    _Iehovah._—God Almighty, God Omnipotent, hear my prayer:

    _Elohim._—God with us, God be always present with us:

    _Binah._—Strengthen us and support us, both now and for ever:

    _Aralim._—In these our undertakings, which we perform but as
    instruments in Thy hands:

    _Zabbathi_ (should be Shabbathii).—In the hands of Thee, the great
    God of Sabäoth.

    _Hesel_ (should be Chesed).—Thou great God, governor and creator of
    the planets, and of the Host of Heaven:

    _Hasmalim_ (should be Chashmalim).—Command them by Thine almighty
    power:

    _Zelez_ (should be Zedeq).—To be now present and assisting to us Thy
    poor servants, both now and for ever.

    _Elohim Geber_ (should be Gibor).—Most Almighty and eternal and ever
    living Lord God:

    _Seraphim._—Command Thy seraphim:

    _Camael_, _Madim_.—To attend on us now at this time, to assist us,
    and to defend us from all perils and dangers.

    _Eloha._—O Almighty God! be present with us both now and for ever:

    _Tetragrammaton._—And let thine Almighty power and presence ever
    guard and protect us now and for ever:

    _Raphael._—Let thy holy angel Raphael wait upon us at this present
    and for ever:

    _Schemes_ (or Shemesh).—To assist us in these our undertakings.

    _Iehovah._—God Almighty, God Omnipotent, hear my prayer:

    _Sabäoth._—Thou great God of Sabäoth:

    _Netzah_ (or Netzach).—All-seeing God:

    _Elohim._—God be present with us, and let thy presence be now and
    always present with us:

    _Haniel._—Let thy holy angel Haniel come and minister unto us at
    this present.

    _Sabäoth._—O thou great God of Sabäoth, be present with us at this
    time and for ever:

    _Hodben_ (should be Hod simply).—Let Thine Almighty power defend us
    and protect us, both now and for ever:

    _Michael._—Let Michael, who is, under Thee, general of thy heavenly
    host:

    _Cochab._—Come and expel all evil and danger from us both now and
    for ever.

    _Sadai._—Thou great God of all wisdom and knowledge:

    _Jesal_ (should be Iesod).—Instruct Thy poor and most humble
    servant:

    _Cherubim._—By Thy holy cherubim:

    _Gabriel._—By Thy Holy Angel Gabriel, who is the Author and
    Messenger of good tidings:

    _Levanah._—Direct and support us at this present and for ever.


       THE EXPLANATION OF THE TWO TRIANGLES[40] IN THE PARCHMENT.


    _Alpha And Omega._—Thou, O great God, Who art the beginning and the
    end:

    _Tetragrammaton._—Thou God of Almighty power, be ever present with
    us to guard and protect us, and let Thy Holy Spirit and presence be
    now and always with us:

    _Soluzen._—I command thee, thou Spirit of whatsoever region thou
    art, to come unto this circle:

    _Halliza._—And appear in human shape:

    _Bellator_ (or Ballaton).—And speak unto us audibly in our
    mother-tongue:

    _Bellonoy_ (or Bellony).—And show, and discover unto us all treasure
    that thou knowest of, or that is in thy keeping, and deliver it unto
    us quietly:

    _Hallii._ _Hra._—And answer all such questions as we may demand
    without any defect now at this time.


                  AN EXPLANATION OF SOLOMON’S TRIANGLE


_Anephezeton._—Thou great God of all the Heavenly Host:

_Primeumaton._—Thou Who art the First and Last, let all spirits be
subject unto us, and let the Spirit be bound in this triangle, which
disturbs this place:

_Michael._—By Thy Holy Angel Michael, until I shall discharge him.

(HERE ENDETH THIS FIRST BOOK OF THE LEMEGETON, WHICH IS CALLED THE
GOETIA.)

Footnote 40:

  Evidently meaning both the Hexagram and the Pentagram of Solomon.
  (_See Figures 155 and 156._)




               _Ye Conjuratiouns of ye Booke Goetia in ye
               Lemegeton which Solomoun ye Kynge did give
            unto Lemuel hys sonne, rendered into ye Magicall
       or Angelike Language by our Illustrious and ever-Glorious
                    Frater, ye Wise Perdurabo, that
              Myghtye Chiefe of ye Rosy-Cross Fraternitye,
            now sepulchred in ye Vault of ye Collegium S.S.
                       And soe may we doe alle!_


_ATTE YE BATHES OF ART._

                 Asperges me, Domine, hyssopo, et mundabor:
                 Lavabis me, et super nivem dealbabor.

                  *       *       *       *       *

_ATTE YE INDUYNGE OF YE HOLY VESTURES._

_In the mystery of these vestures of the Holy Ones, I gird up my power
in the girdles of righteousness and truth in the power of the Most High:
Ancor: Amacor: Amides: Theodonias: Anitor: let be mighty my power: let
it endure for ever: in the power of Adonai, to whom the praise and the
glory shall be; whose end cannot be._


_YE FYRSTE CONJOURATIOUN._


_I invoke and move thee, O thou, Spirit N.: and being exalted above ye
in the power of the Most High, I say unto thee, Obey! in the name
Beralensis, Baldachiensis, Paumachia, and Apologiae Sedes: and of the
mighty ones who govern, spirits, Liachidae and ministers of the House of
Death: and by the Chief Prince of the seat of Apologia in the Ninth
Legion, I do invoke thee and by invoking conjure thee. And being exalted
above ye in the power of the Most High, I say unto thee, Obey! in the
name of him who spake and it was, to whom all creatures and things obey.
Moreover I, whom God made in the likeness of God, who is the creator
according to his living breath, stir thee up in the name which is the
voice of wonder of the mighty God, El, strong and unspeakable, O thou
Spirit N. And I say to thee obey, in the name of him who spake and it
was; and in every one of ye, O ye names of God! Moreover in the names
Adonai, El, Elohim, Elohi, Ehyeh Asher Ehyeh, Zabaoth, Elion, Iah,
Tetragrammaton, Shaddai, Lord God Most High, I stir thee up; and in our
strength I say Obey! O Spirit N. Appear unto His servants in a moment;
before the circle in the likeness of a man; and visit me in peace. And
in the ineffable name Tetragrammaton Iehovah, I say, Obey! whose mighty
sound being exalted in power the pillars are divided, the winds of the
firmament groan aloud; the fire burns not; the earth moves in
earthquakes; and all things of the house of heaven and earth and the
dwelling-place of darkness are as earthquakes, and are in torment, and
are confounded in thunder. Come forth, O Spirit N. in a moment: let thy
dwelling-place be empty, apply unto us the secrets of Truth and obey my
power. Come forth, visit us in peace, appear unto my eyes; be friendly:
Obey the living breath! For I stir thee up in the name of the God of
Truth who liveth for ever, Helioren. Obey the living breath, therefore
continually unto the end as my thoughts appear to my eyes: therefore be
friendly: speaking the secrets of Truth in voice and in understanding._


_YE SECOUNDE CONJOURATIOUN_


_I invoke thee, and move thee, and stir thee up O Spirit N. appear unto
my eyes before the circle in the likeness of a man in the names and by
the name Iah and Vau, which Adam spake and in the name of God, Agla,
which Lot spake: and it was as pleasant deliverers unto him and his
house and in the name Ioth which Iacob spake in the voice of the Holy
ones who cast him down, and it was also as pleasant deliverers in the
anger of his brother and in the name Anaphaxeton, which Aaron spake and
it was as the Secret Wisdom and in the name Zabaoth which Mosheh spake,
and all things of water were as blood; and in the name Asher Ehyeh
Oriston, which Mosheh spake, and all waters were bringing forth
creatures who wax strong, which lifted up unto the houses, which destroy
all things and in the name of Elion which Mosheh spake, and it was as
stones from the firmament of wrath, such as was not in the ages of Time
the beginning of the Earth and in the name of Adni, which Mosheh spake
and there appeared creatures of earth who destroyed what the big stones
did not: and in the name Schema Amathia, which Ioshua invoked, and the
Sun remained over ye, O ye hills the seats of Gibeon, and in the names
Alpha and Omega which Daniel spake, and destroyed Bel and the Dragon:
and in the name Emmanuel which the sons of God sang praises in the midst
of the burning plain, and flourished in conquest: and in the name
Hagios, and by the Throne of Adni, and in Ischyros, Athanatos,
Paracletos: and in O Theos, Ictros, Athanatos. And in these names of
secret truth, Agla, On, Tetragrammaton, do I invoke and move thee. And
in these names, and all things that are the names of the God of Secret
Truth who liveth for ever, the All-Powerful. I invoke and stir thee up,
O spirit N. Even by him who spake it was, to whom all creatures are
obedient and in the Extreme Justice and Anger of God; and by the veil(?)
that is before the glory of God, mighty; and by the creatures of living
breath before the Throne whose eyes are east and west; by the fire in
the fire of just Glory of the Throne; by the Holy ones of Heaven; and by
the secret wisdom of God, I, exalted in power, stir thee up. Appear
before this circle; obey in all things that I say; in the seal Basdathea
Baldachia; and in this Name Primeumaton, which Mosheh spake, and the
earth was divided, and Korah, Dathan, and Abiram fell in the depth.
Therefore obey in all things, O spirit N., obey thy creation. Come thou
forth: appear unto my eyes; visit us in peace, be friendly; come forth
in the 24th of a moment; obey my power, speaking the secrets of Truth in
voice and in understanding!_


_YE CONSTRAYNTE._


_I stir thee up, O spirit N. in all things that are the names of glory
and power of God the Great One who is greater than understanding, Adni
Ihvh Tzabaoth, come forth in the 24th of a moment, let Thy
dwelling-place be empty; apply thyself unto the secret truth and obey my
power: appear unto my eyes, visit us in peace, speaking the secrets of
truth in voice and understanding. I stir thee up and move thee, O spirit
N., in all the names that I have said, and I add these one and six names
wherein Solomon, the lord of the secret wisdom, placed yourselves,
spirits of wrath, in a vessel, Adonai, Preyai Tetragrammaton,
Anaphaxeton Inessenfatoal, Pathtomon and Itemon: appear before this
circle; obey in all things my power. And as thou art he that obeys not
and comes not I shall be in thy power, O God Most High that liveth for
ever, who is the creator of all things in six days Eie, Saraye, and in
my power in the name Prieumaton that ruleth over the palaces of heaven,
Curse Thee, and destroy thy seat, joy, and power; and I bind thee in the
depth of Abaddon, to remain until the day of judgment whose end cannot
be. And I bind thee in the fire of sulphur mingled with poison and the
seas of fire and sulphur: come forth, therefore, obey my power and
appear before this circle. Therefore come forth in the name of the Holy
Ones Zabaoth, Adonai, Amioran. Come! for I am Adonai who stir thee up._


_YE POTENT INVOCATIOUN OF HYS KYNGE._


_O thou great powerful governor Amaimon, who reigneth exalted in the
power of the only El above all spirits in the kingdoms of the East,
(South, West, North), I invoke and move thee in the name of the true
God, and in God whom thou worshippest: and in the seal of thy creation:
and in the mighty names of God, Iehevohe Tetragrammaton, who cast thee
down from Heaven, thou and the spirits of darkness, and in all the names
of the mighty God who is the creator of Heaven and earth, and the
dwelling of darkness, and all things and in their power and brightness;
and in the name Primeumaton who reigns over the palaces of Heaven. Bring
forth, I say, the spirit N.; bring him forth in the 24th of a moment let
his dwelling be empty until he visits us in peace, speaking the secrets
of truth; until he obey my power and his creation in the power of God,
El, who is the Creator and doth dispose of all things, heaven,
firmament, earth, and the dwelling of darkness._


_YE GENERALL CURSE._


YCLEPT YE SPIRITS’ CHAYNE, AGAINST ALL SPIRITS YT REBELLE.

_O thou wicket spirit N. that obeyeth not, because I made a law and
invoked the names of the glorious and ineffable God of Truth, the
creator of all, and thou obeyest not the mighty sounds that I make:
therefore I curse thee in the depth of Abaddon to remain until the day
of judgment in torment in fire and in sulphur without end, until thou
appear before our will and obey my power. Come, therefore, in the 24th
of a moment, before the circle in the triangle in this name and by this
name of God, Adni, Tzabaoth, Adonai, Amioran. Come! Come! for it is the
Lord of Lords Adni, that stirreth thee up._


_YE CONJOURATIOUN OF YE FYRE._


_I stir thee up, O thou fire, in him who is thy Creator and of all
creatures. Torment, burn, destroy the spirit N. always whose end cannot
be, I judge thee in judgment and in extreme justice, O spirit N.,
because thou art he that obeyeth not my power and obeyeth not that law
which the Lord God made, and obeyeth not the Mighty Sounds and the
Living Breath which I invoke, which I send: Come forth, I, who am the
Servant of the Same Most High governor Lord God powerful, Iehovohe, I
who am exalted in power and am mighty in his power above ye, O thou who
comest not giving obedience and faith to him that liveth and triumpheth.
Therefore I say the judgment: I curse thee and destroy the name N. and
the seal N., which I have placed in this dwelling of poison, and I burn
thee in fire whose end cannot be; and I cast thee down unto the seas of
torment, out of which thou shalt not rise until thou come to my eyes:
visit me in peace: be friendly before the circle in the_ Δ _in the 24th
of a moment in the likeness of a man not unto the terror of the sons of
men the creatures or all things on the face of the earth. Obey my power
like reasoning creatures; obey the living breath, the law which I
speak._


_YE GRETER CURSE._


_Hearken to me, O ye Heavens! O thou Spirit N. because thou art the
disobedient one who is wicked and appearest not, speaking the secrets of
truth according to the living breath; I, exalted in the power of God,
the All-powerful, the center of the circle, powerful God who liveth,
whose end cannot be, Iehevohe Tetragrammaton, the only creator of
heaven, earth, and dwelling of darkness and all that is in their
palaces; who disposeth in secret wisdom of all things in darkness and
light: Curse thee and cast thee down and destroy thy seat, joy and
power, and I bind thee in the depths of Abaddon, to remain until the day
of judgment whose end cannot be, I say, unto the seas of fire and
sulphur which I have prepared for the wicked spirits that obey not; the
sons of iniquity._

_Let the company of heaven curse thee!_

_Let the sun, moon, all the stars curse thee!_

_Let the light and all the Holy Ones of Heaven curse thee unto the
burning flame that liveth for ever, and unto the torment unspeakable!_

_And even as thy name and seal, which I have put in this dwelling of
poison, shall be in torment among creatures of sulphur and bitter sting,
burning in fire of earth, in them Iehevohe and exalted in power in these
three names, Tetragrammaton Anaphaxeton, Primeumaton, I cast thee down,
O wicked spirit N. unto the seas of fire and sulphur which are prepared
for the wicked spirits that obey not, the sons of iniquity, to remain
until the day of judgment; let the Mercies of God forget thee; let the
face of God forget the face of N. who will not see light: let God
forget, I say that shall be the balance of justice over the sons of
living breath and death and the world, by fire._


_YE ADDRESSE UNTO YE SPIRIT ON HYS COMING._


_Behold! I confound thee as thou art he that obeys not! Behold the
mysteries of the seal of Solomon which I bring forth unto thy power and
presence! Behold the creator, the centre of the circle of the living
breath; he that is exalted in the power of God and shall not see unto
the terror: he that powerfully invoketh and stirreth thee up unto
visible appearance: he, the lord of thy governments whose Name is called
Octinomos._

_Obey, therefore, my power as a reasoning creature in the name of the
Lord._


_YE WELCOME UNTO YE SPIRIT DYGNYTIE._


_I am he that is looking with gladness upon thee, O thou spirit ... N.
beautiful and praiseworthy! with gladness I say, because thou art called
in him who is creator of Heaven and earth and the dwelling of darkness,
and all things that are in their palaces, and because thou art the
servant of obedience. In these the power by which thou art obedient to
the living breath, I bind thee to remain visible to our eyes in power
and presence as the servant of fealty before the circle until I say
“Descend unto thy dwelling” until the living breath of the voice of the
Lord is according to the law which shall be given unto thee._

                  *       *       *       *       *

_By the seal of the secret wisdom of Solomon thou art called!_

_Obey the mighty sounds! obey the living breath of the voice of the
Lord!_

                  *       *       *       *       *

_Follows ye charge._


_YE LICENSE TO YE SPIRIT YT HE MAYE DEPART._


_O thou Spirit N. because thou art the servant of fealty and obedience,
and because thou art he that obeyeth my power and thy creation;
therefore I say Descend unto thy dwelling, obey the law which I have
made, without terror to the sons of men, creatures, all things upon the
surface of the earth._

_Descend therefore I say, and be thou as stewards of Time; come forth in
a moment, even as servants that hearken to the voice of the Lord; in the
moment in which I invoke thee and stir thee up and move thee in the
mysteries of the secret wisdom of the Creator!_

_Descend unto thy dwelling place in pleasure: let there be the mercies
of God upon thee: be friendly in continuing; whose long continuance
shall be comforters unto all creatures. Amen._




 ● Transcriber’s Notes:
    ○ Text that was in italics is enclosed by underscores (_italics_).
    ○ Footnotes have been moved to follow the sections in which they are
      referenced.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LESSER KEY OF SOLOMON GOETIA THE BOOK OF EVIL SPIRITS ***