
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 76654 ***



                THE NEW SCIENCE OF SPACE SPEECH

                      By Vincent H. Gaddis

        How to talk to Martians, dolphins and creatures
        from the farthest stars--not tomorrow, but now!


A giant ear to listen to the whispers from infinity is being built at
Sugar Grove, W. Va. This 600-foot radio telescope, largest ever
designed, will cost $100 million. When completed, its massive antenna,
covering 6½ acres, will be trained on the mighty stellar mainland far
beyond our solar system.

Astronomers believe that it will pick up cosmic impulses originating in
stars from 60 to 80 light-years distant--seven times farther than
America’s largest existing radio telescope.

Meanwhile, a scientist in the Virgin Islands talks to a frisky dolphin.
And the aquatic mammal replies, imitating the man’s words with uncanny
accuracy.

And at centers of learning in the United States and abroad scholars
patiently work over mathematical charts and word lists, seeking formulas
that will solve the problem of space speech.

These diverse activities are unified by a common purpose--to intercept
and to interpret a possible message from outer space.

This signal across the vast void of the spaceways from intelligent but
alien beings will be, perhaps, the most momentous event in human
history. It could come tomorrow, or it may not be received for a century
or more.

When it does come, man should be prepared to reply. This means we must
devise some new method of communication that will transmit thoughts to
non-human alien minds.

In awarding a contract for a space speech project, Dr. Dale W. Jenkins,
chief of the National Space Administration’s environment biology
programs, stressed the great need for this knowledge.

“We have not yet determined whether there are any communications
directed at earth from outer space,” he said. “If we do make contact, we
will have to work out systems of understanding.”

This understanding is an all-important requisite as man reaches out
toward the stars.

Understanding, however, will also have to be applied by man to himself
when he joins the community of civilizations beyond.

Once interstellar intercourse is established, it will herald a new era
in which man will have to recognize another species or form of life as
intellectually his equal or more likely his superior. A recent
psychological study of the possible effects of outer space contacts
indicates that it will deflate human egoism with far-reaching
consequences to his culture.

                   *       *       *       *       *

The problem of space speech is two-fold.

First, there are the techniques to be used in actual physical contact
with other world inhabitants; second, the far more complex problem of
exchanging concepts through the medium of radio communication.

Suppose you are a space explorer. You have landed on Mars or Venus and
for the first time you are meeting intelligent creatures that are the
products of a completely different line of evolution.

You possess five relatively well-developed senses. If the beings are not
hostile, you must first determine if they have the same senses, only
some part of them, or additional senses that man does not have.

For example, they may have a sense similar to extra-sensory perception
and communicate with each other through telepathy. If you can exchange
thoughts with them, that is fine. If you cannot tune in on their mental
wavelengths, you’re in trouble.

The sense of smell is practically limited to attractive perfumes and
repulsive odors. Taste has the same limitations. Touch has been used for
communication between humans, as in teaching the blind and deaf, but it
requires physical contact (certainly a risky act when meeting strangers)
and is limited to elementary concepts at best.

The only practical senses--of those which we humans possess, at any
rate--for direct communication are sight and hearing.

If our Martians or Venusians have these senses--and if their reasoning
processes are similar to those of humans--then communication could
probably be established in the same manner with which we teach our
children.

You could use “sign language.” You could point to your mouth and move
your jaws to indicate you thought refreshments should be served. You
could point to their head or heads (if they had them) and then at your
own head and say “head.” With time and patience, a basis for
communication could be established.

But suppose their methods of communication are entirely different.
Suppose they use antennae, like ants, or gyrations, like bees.

Dr. Karl von Frisch, the German zoologist, discovered that when a bee
locates a rich source of nectar, she returns to the hive and performs a
dance. The number of times she turns reveals the distance, and her
position in relation to the sun and the hive gives the direction.

This “breakthrough” into subhuman communication required controlled and
sustained observation. It will have to be the necessary procedure if man
encounters creatures with similar characteristics with his present
knowledge.

Von Frisch’s discovery was a one-way avenue of understanding. But if the
ants and the bees were much larger and more intelligent, we can assume
that a demonstrative style of language could be devised for mutual
communication.

To our scientists it is obvious that before our spacemen confront alien
beings on a distant planet, we must learn the fundamentals of developing
communication with a non-human but intelligent species right here on
earth. And this is now in progress with “Project Dolphin.”

                   *       *       *       *       *

Bottle-nosed dolphins are not fish, but aquatic mammals. Often, but
inaccurately, called porpoises, they are well known as clever,
frolicsome entertainers at marineland exhibits.

Dolphins are by far the most intelligent animals other than man, and
their brain power in some respects may even be superior to man’s. The
dolphin brain is 40 per cent larger than the human, although smaller in
proportion to body weight, and the cerebral cortex--the layer of gray
matter that originates rational thought--is just as complicated.

Dr. John C. Lilly, a neurophysiologist and a noted authority on the
mammal, is in charge of the project. The research is principally being
conducted at the Communications Research Institute of Charlotte Amalie,
located at the U.S. Navy base on St. Thomas, Virgin Islands.

Dr. Lilly is working under a contract awarded in 1962 by the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration. The contract is for basic
scientific research “on the feasibility and methodology for establishing
communications between man and other species.”

Dolphins have a complex vocal language. They talk to each other with
sharp, high-pitched whistles and they talk almost continuously. Dr.
Lilly has determined that the dolphin distress call is “an undulating
sound,” with a rasping noise made periodically for range-finding.

Interpreting the dolphin vocabulary will not be easy since the creature
emits heavy breathing sounds and there are other masking noises.

In experiments with ESB (electric stimulation of the brain), Dr. Lilly
located the portion of the dolphin brain that created a feeling of
pleasure. The dolphin almost immediately learned how to turn on a switch
producing the current. For comparison, in similar tests it was found
that monkeys required 300 or more tries before they attained their
ability.

One day the electrical device broke down. The dolphin, annoyed at losing
his pleasurable sensation, began making a series of sounds in imitation
of the laboratory equipment. Dr. Lilly made a tape recording of these
sounds.

Later the doctor played back the recording and in order to more
distinctly hear the sounds he decided to run the tape at one quarter its
normal speed.

It was then that Dr. Lilly made an astonishing discovery.

With exaggerated slowness, he listened to his own voice on the tape
announcing the footage--“three, two, three”--and the dolphin immediately
and clearly repeated the words in high-pitched whistles. Other tape
recordings of what had seemed to be an unintelligible series of squawks
and quacks, when played at half or quarter speed with the sound volume
lowered, confirmed the discovery.

The dolphins were not only distinctly imitating the human words they
heard, but were compressing their mimicry as to time. They were talking
at a rate eight times faster than humans.

One dolphin, Dr. Lilly recalls, “mimicked my speaking voice so well that
my wife laughed out loud, and he copied her laughter.”

When one of the doctor’s assistants who had a southern drawl talked to
one dolphin, the animal’s voice came back in clear imitation ...
complete with the southern accent.

The next step--and it’s a big one--is to learn the dolphin language. The
high-pitched, high-speed chatter must be broken down into definite
meanings.

Dr. Frank D. Drake, director of Project Ozma (the recent attempt to
receive possible messages by radio telescope), considers the dolphin
language study to be of great importance.

He says the project “needs the skills of the radio astronomer in
extracting signals from noise, and then the work of the linguist, and,
perhaps, the cryptographer. It could well be, if the dolphin studies are
correct, that we have right here on earth another intelligent race that
is even more alien than some we might encounter in space.”

                   *       *       *       *       *

Second, there is the problem of interpreting and transmitting
information through radio communication.

In April, 1960, Project Ozma was launched. The 85-foot radio telescope
of the National Radio Astronomy Observatory at Green Bank, W. Va., was
focused by government scientists on two stars in an attempt to pick up
artificially produced signals.

The stars were Tau Ceti and Epsilon Eridani, 11 light-years or about 66
trillion miles away. They were chosen because they were similar to our
own sun in size and rate of rotation.

The frequency at which natural hydrogen emits radio energy in space is
1,420 megacycles, and thus it is a universal constant. Dr. Drake tuned
the receiver on both sides of this band.

Day after day the impulses were transmitted to a pen that traced erratic
lines on a moving paper roll. But no repetitive pattern appeared that
would indicate deliberate signals.

Early in 1961 it was announced that Project Ozma was being suspended. It
is expected to be resumed when the new 600-foot radio telescope is
completed.

The failure of Project Ozma to receive a message during a few months in
operation is no surprise. In fact, it would not be a surprise if no
signals were received during daily operation for a millennium.

There are known to be at least 100 quintillion stars. Focusing on one
random star in the hope it has a planet having intelligent life beaming
signals in our direction is like trying to find a specific drop of water
in the ocean.

When a reporter during Project Ozma asked if there was any word from our
remote fellow creatures, one scientist told him to come back in 10,000
years.

Yet certain factors may improve these chances. Advanced beings might
periodically check the solar systems nearest them to see if they have
company. It is not unreasonable to suppose that there is regular cosmic
conversation between greatly developed cultures, and if we could detect
a channel we might be able to plug in on the party line.

We can only hope, however, that they are using a method we can detect.
Man has only recently emerged from savagery and is only beginning to
look beyond his little world. To the cosmic callers, our most advanced
equipment might be as primitive as smoke signals are to us.

Again, we might be trying to contact beings so entirely different from
us that we would have no common ground upon which to build
understanding. They might not even respond as we do to the same stimuli.
Their appearance, evolution, structure, environment and thinking
processes could even be beyond the limits of our imaginations.

But a signal could come--an impulse from out of the boundless abyss
telling us we are not alone. What would be the nature of this message?
And how could we reply?

Assuming that our senders are using radio wavelengths and have enough
similarity to us for mutual understanding, we would first have to
isolate the signals from the hash of natural static.

Next, we would have to “crack the code.” The usual cryptographic
techniques, which depend on some basic knowledge of the language and
letter frequencies, would not be adequate. We can only hope that the
callers give us some clues.

Scientists expect any messages received will be mathematical in nature,
since mathematical principles may be regarded as universal constants.

The message might be a simple numeral progression or the numbers of a
constant, such as the wave length of the hydrogen atom or the speed of
light.

They might send _pi_, for example, the ratio of the circumference of a
circle to its diameter. It’s a non-stop number, but we would understand
if it was worked out to six or eight decimal places. “_Pi_ from the sky”
would be the story of the ages.

Once we had received this signal for recognition and replied in equally
simple terms would come the real problem of interpreting or devising a
means for transmitting speed.

                   *       *       *       *       *

Hans Fruedenthal, professor of mathematics at the University of Utrecht
(Netherlands), has devised a system he calls Lincos (meaning “Lingua
Cosmica” or “Cosmic Language”). It consists of teaching the meaning of
certain sounds by using numbers. The numbers would be signified by
“dots” or “beeps”; the sounds by radio signals of various frequencies
and lengths. To illustrate the method, let us assume that the sound
“bloop” stands for “equal.” Three dots would be sent, then bloop, then
three dots. This would be repeated with other numbers until the
listeners associated the sound with equal numbers.

The concept of “less than” would similarly be sent by several dots,
another sound (like “tweet”), followed by a greater number of dots. The
reverse--like a greater number of dots, another sound, and a lesser
number of dots--would signify “greater than.” Once these concepts were
understood, the operative signs like add, subtract, etc. could be
taught. Thus a mathematical vocabulary would be established.

Next would come transmitting the length of our basic time unit. The
Fruedenthal system would send, say, a four-second dash, followed by the
Lincos sound for “second,” then four dots. Using different dash lengths
with corresponding dots and the same sound, it is assumed that the
recipients would observe that the length of the dash was proportional to
the number of dots.

Time concepts (including universal constants) would lead to teaching
units of physical length.

Upon this foundation of mathematics, time and dimensions, Lincos
develops an ingenious and extensive language for a detailed description
of earth, its inhabitants and our culture.

Lincos, of course, assumes that the listeners are capable of
understanding our mathematical concepts and that their reasoning
processes are similar to ours. It illustrates one great fundamental
difficulty in alien communication: whatever system we use, it has to be
devised within the limitations of our one-planet knowledge and
experience.

The basic principle of association (that is relating numbers to sounds
to teach meanings) can be used in other systems. Some form of
association, probably beginning with objects and sounds, will be
necessary to teach dolphins a human language.

One other fundamental means of communication is being considered by
scientists. This is the use of geometrical designs or symbols which
would then evolve into pictures. It would be most practical in
interplanetary communication.

A picture, as the Chinese say, is worth a thousand words.

In interstellar communication, geometrical figures could possibly be
signified by numbers. Thus the pi ratio would denote a circle, three
equal successive numbers an equilateral triangle, four equal numbers a
square, and so on.

From this elementary basis, a method of translating sounds into drawings
could be developed. This might take the form of having electrical
circuits attached to pens or tiny lights respond to various sounds, thus
transcribing the pictures to paper or film.

The correct interpretation of whatever messages we receive will be of
extreme importance. An error could be disastrous.

We need only recall the difficulties we have had in translating early
records of our own species to know that interpreting the signals of
otherworld beings may be very difficult. Egyptian hieroglyphics were
given many translations that contradicted each other before the Rosetta
Stone was found. In one example, there were 12 different translations.

Should this problem develop, we can only hope that the other-worlders
are friendly, tolerant and patient.

Then there is the time factor.

If, during Project Ozma, a signal had been received and a reply sent, it
would have been 22 years before we knew whether our answer had been
received. A reply to a message from 80 light-years away received by the
new radio telescope being built would take 160 years for confirmation.

Living languages are fluid. As new words are coined, others become
obsolete. Definitions change with passing years.

King George I of England, upon inspecting Sir Christopher Wren’s
masterpiece, St. Paul’s Cathedral, told the famous architect that his
creation was “amusing, awful and artificial.” Sir Christopher was
delighted with the royal compliments.

Three centuries ago amusing meant amazing, awful meant awe-inspiring,
and artificial meant artistic.

With time as dimension in universal communication, we would have to
choose our words with care.

The accelerated scientific progress of recent years will doubtless
continue, with new ways and means of cosmic communication being
developed. Radio astronomy itself is barely three decades old.
Revolutionary techniques in interstellar contacts may be just around the
corner.

                   *       *       *       *       *

Has radio communication with alien beings already occurred? This is a
startling possibility.

On August 22, 1924, the planet Mars approached to within thirty-four and
a half million miles from the earth. Radio broadcasting stations were
silenced and scientists listened for a possible message from across
space.

At the suggestion of the late Dr. David Todd, professor emeritus of
astronomy at Amherst College, the U.S. Government through diplomatic
channels requested that all countries with high-power transmitters
silence their stations for five minutes every hour from 11:50 p.m.
August 21 to 11:50 p.m. August 23.

Station WOR, Newark, N.J., reported receiving a word translated as
“Eunza.” Other stations announced receiving strange signals.

Twenty-three years later, in 1947, Gene Darling, an early “ham” operator
and General Electric Co. employee in Schenectady, N. Y., said he and an
assistant had failed to turn off a test transmitter. “It kept on sending
out automatic code signals,” he said, “and fearing criticism, we never
told of our mistake.”

But something else happened during this 1924 test period of silence that
remains a mystery today.

C. Francis Jenkins, of Washington, D. C., had only recently invented a
radio photo message continuous-transmission machine. He was asked by Dr.
Todd to take a record of any signals received during the periods of
silence.

The recording device was attached to a receiver adjusted to the 6,000
meter wave length. Incoming signals caused flashes of light, which were
printed on the film by an instrument passing over its surface from side
to side. The film was in a roll, 30 feet long and six inches wide, and
it was slowly unwound by clockwork under the instrument and light bulb
which responded to transmitted sounds.

When the film was developed, it disclosed a fairly regular arrangement
of dots and dashes along one side, but on the other side, at almost
evenly spaced intervals, were curiously jumbled groups each taking the
form of a man’s face.

Scientists at the radio division of the National Bureau of Standards and
military code experts examined the film and admitted it was a freak that
they couldn’t explain.

“The film of faces is a permanent record that can be studied,” Dr. Todd
said, “and who knows just what these signals may have been?”

There have been other incidents. Marconi, the father of wireless, heard
strange signals in 1921. And in 1928 Prof. A. M. Low, famous English
scientist, listened to a “mysterious series of dots and dashes.”

Ham radio operators have occasionally reported curious stories. In QST,
official organ of the International Amateur Radio Union, July, 1950,
issue, Byron Goodman, assistant technical editor of the magazine, tells
of a ham receiving strange signals.

Certain unexplainable “echoes” were heard by scientists in 1927, and
again in 1928 and 1934 while they were experimenting with the
capabilities of radio. The Danish scientist, Hals, and two Scandinavian
experimenters, Størmer and Petersen, received echoes from 280,000 to
2,800,000 miles from the earth.

Dr. Arthur C. Clarke reported that in a series of tests in Holland radio
echoes of eight seconds delay (corresponding to a reflector at a
distance of 744,000 miles) were obtained repeatedly in 1946.

What is the explanation?

Dr. Ronald N. Bracewell, professor of electrical engineering at Stanford
University and co-author with J. L. Pawsey of a standard textbook
(_Radio Astronomy_, Oxford University Press, 1955), has a theory. He
suggests that some of these echoes may have come from a satellite in
orbit around our sun.

If highly advanced beings have achieved space travel, placing a
satellite in a solar system would be more practical than beaming radio
signals continuously at thousands of stars for thousands of years.

Dr. Bracewell suggests that the experimental broadcasts included trigger
signals that caused the satellite to respond with echoes. If the
satellite’s reply was repeated by man, the satellite would probably
release its store of information.

                   *       *       *       *       *

If man does make contact with a superior alien civilization, what will
happen?

Recently the Brookings Institution released a report on this question.
The study was made for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration
at a cost of $96,000.

If intelligent life is discovered on other worlds, the report warned,
the stability of earth’s civilization will be threatened. It recommended
a psychological preparation of human beings prior to the discovery.

“While the discovery of intelligent life in other parts of the universe
is not likely in the immediate future,” the report said, “it could
nevertheless happen at any time.”

This is the lesson of history: When a culture is faced with a superior
culture, it either disintegrates or is changed drastically.

Japan, when it was opened to the outside world, succeeded in adjusting
to the new conditions. The Aztec culture collapsed.

Our beliefs, institutions and culture have been based on the premise
that man is the most intelligent of creatures. Would we be able to
assume a subordinate role?

Perhaps Dr. Otto Struve, the noted astronomer, was thinking about this
when newsmen were interviewing him about Project Ozma. “I’m not so sure
we should even answer if we did receive such signals,” he said.

Psychological preparation will certainly be needed.

Dr. Harlow Shapley, the Harvard professor emeritus of astronomy, after
allowing for all elements of chance among the known stars,
conservatively estimates that there should be a million planets with
life-producing elements and conditions.

In all the vastness of space and eons of time, there must be intelligent
life in myriad forms seeking other intelligent life for interstellar
companionship.

When the signal comes, man will answer.

END


[ Transcriber’s Notes:
1. This story appeared in the August 1963 issue of _Worlds of Tomorrow_.
2. The original publication used "earth" to refer to the planet "Earth"
  consistently and "man" to refer to the collective "Man". Retained.
]



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 76654 ***
